Although many studies provide evidence that glutamatergic pathways regulate the secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus, it is controversial as to whether they act directly upon GnRH neurons. The aim of the current study was to determine whether GnRH neurons are susceptible to the neurotoxic actions of specific glutamate agonists (N-methyl-D-aspartate [NMDA] and kainic acid), the rationale being that neurotoxic loss of GnRH neurons would provide evidence that the perikarya possess specific classes of glutamate receptor. Unilateral 1-microl injections of NMDA (12-120 mM), kainic acid (0.5-2.5 mM), or vehicle were stereotaxically directed at the preoptic area (mPOA)/diagonal band of Broca (dbB) in the region of the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) of male adult hamsters (Phodopus sungorus). The number and appearance of GnRH neurons were determined by immunocytochemistry 3-8 days later. The morphology of GnRH neurons in the vicinity of the injection sites appeared normal after both kainic acid and NMDA treatment, and there was no significant decrease in the numbers of GnRH perikarya identified following these treatments. Both agonists caused massive cellular loss when injected directly into cortical areas and striatum. In the experimental studies, there was little neuronal loss within the mPOA or dbB after either toxin, despite clear neuronal loss in areas adjacent to the injection sites, including ventral striatum and olfactory cortex. In follow-up studies, immunocytochemical and in situ hybridisation analysis of the NMDAR1 and NMDAR2 glutamate receptor subunits confirmed their widespread distribution in regions containing GnRH perikarya, but no colocalization within GnRH neurons was observed. The susceptibility of neural areas to NMDA neurotoxicity did not correlate with any difference in the regional expression of these glutamate receptor subunits. The resistance of GnRH neurons to the neurotoxic actions of two different glutamate agonists and the failure to detect colocalisation of NMDAR1 or NMDAR2 subunits within GnRH perikarya are consistent with the notion that the effects of glutamate upon GnRH secretion are not exerted directly upon GnRH cell bodies.