PURPOSE: Despite generally high cure rates in patients with metastatic testicular germ cell tumors, patients with incomplete response to cisplatin-based first-line therapy or with relapsed disease after high-dose salvage chemotherapy have a very poor prognosis. This phase II study evaluates the use of gemcitabine in patients with intensively pretreated or cisplatin-refractory testicular germ cell cancers. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty-five patients (median age, 33 years) were enrolled; 31 patients were fully assessable. All patients had metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell tumors; eight patients had extragonadal primary tumors. Twenty patients (63%) had lung metastases, and 12 patients (39%) had liver metastases. The median number of prior cisplatin-based chemotherapy cycles was seven; 22 patients (71%) had received high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem-cell transplantation, and 19 patients (61%) had received treatment with paclitaxel. Seventeen patients (54%) were considered refractory or absolutely refractory to chemotherapy. RESULTS: Six of 31 assessable patients (19%) responded favorably to gemcitabine, 11 patients (35%) displayed no change, and 14 patients (45%) had disease progression. The median time to treatment failure was 4 months (range, 2 to 9+ months), and the median survival was 6 months (range, 2 to 23 months). Patients received a median of six gemcitabine applications. Ten patients (32%) required dose reductions, mainly owing to hematologic toxicity. Grade 3/4 granulocytopenia occurred in four patients (13%) and grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia in seven patients (22%). One case of severe sepsis was observed. CONCLUSION: Gemcitabine displays antitumor activity in intensively pretreated and refractory germ cell tumors. Responses were observed in approximately 20% of patients, including three of 22 patients after previous high-dose chemotherapy and one of four patients with mediastinal tumors. Gemcitabine may be a reasonable palliative option for intensively pretreated patients and should be further investigated to define its role in the risk-adapted treatment strategies for germ cell tumors.