Selective intestinal decontamination with norfloxacin is useful to prevent bacterial infections in several groups of cirrhotic patients at high risk of infection. However, the emergence of infections caused by Escherichia coli resistant to quinolones has recently been observed in cirrhotic patients undergoing prophylactic norfloxacin. Our aim is to determine the characteristics of the infections caused by E. coli resistant to norfloxacin in hospitalized cirrhotic patients. One hundred and six infections caused by E. coli in 99 hospitalized cirrhotic patients were analyzed and distributed into two groups: group I (n = 67), infections caused by E. coli sensitive to norfloxacin, and group II (n = 39), infections caused by E. coli resistant to norfloxacin. The clinical and analytical characteristics at diagnosis of the infection were similar in both groups. Previous prophylaxis with norfloxacin was more frequent in group II (15/67, 22.4% vs. 32/39, 82%, P <.0001), as a result of a higher number of patients submitted to continuous long-term prophylaxis in this group, whereas previous short-term prophylaxis was similar in both groups. Infections were more frequently nosocomial-acquired in group II than in group I (17/67, 25.3% vs. 20/39, 51.2%, P =.01). The type of infections was similar in both groups: urinary tract infections 38 in group I and 24 in group II, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis 8 and 2, spontaneous bacteremia 4 and 4, and bacterascites 1 and 0, respectively (pNS). Mortality during hospitalization was similar in the two groups (4/67, 5.9% vs. 5/39, 12.8%, pNS). None of the E. coli resistant to norfloxacin were also resistant to cefotaxime and only one of them was resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. Prophylaxis with norfloxacin, usually continuous long-term prophylaxis, favors the development of infections caused by norfloxacin-resistant E. coli. Long-term antibiotic prophylaxis should therefore be restricted to highly selected groups of cirrhotic patients at high-risk of infection. Infections caused by E. coli resistant to norfloxacin show a severity similar to those caused by sensitive E. coli. No significant associated resistance between norfloxacin and the antibiotics most frequently used in the treatment of bacterial infections in cirrhotic patients has been observed.