The availability of combined vaccines containing protective antigens against the majority of (ideally all) diseases for which universal immunization is recommended in infancy would simplify the implementation, increase the acceptance, reduce the global cost of immunization programmes and improve disease control, while offering the possibility of disease elimination or even pathogen eradication. The desirability of combined vaccines is further enhanced, and made more urgent, because of the increasing number of diseases that can be prevented by vaccination. The complicated logistics of administering different vaccines that each require several inoculations is a significant barrier to successful immunization of a population. Furthermore, interest in immunization is continuously gaining momentum since it is now generally recognised that vaccines are among the safest and most cost-effective medical interventions for infectious diseases that continue, in spite of the widespread use of efficacious antimicrobial drugs, to be an important cause of morbidity and mortality. This burden is likely to increase due to the development of antimicrobial resistance. Basic research on new vaccines or improvement of existing ones such as the use of new technologies may be carried out in academic or other non-industrial laboratories but development work, including the necessary extensive clinical testing, that lead to products that can be approved for routine use is usually co-ordinated and financed by commercial companies. The decision to develop any particular combined vaccine will therefore be influenced not only by its medical desirability and technical feasibility but also the potential financial returns that the required investments in time and resources may bring to the company. All major vaccine manufacturers are currently working, either alone or through strategic alliances, towards developing more polyvalent vaccines by adding antigens such as inactivated polio virus, conjugated Haemophilus influenzae type b polysaccharide and hepatitis B surface antigen to the diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine either in its 'classical' (whole-cell) or more purified (acellular) formulations. Experience is showing that the development of combined vaccines involves much more than the simple mixing of existing antigens. Possible incompatibilities or mutual interferences between the antigens themselves, or between excipients, preservatives, adjuvants, residual contaminants, stabilisers and suspending fluids make it mandatory that each formulation be thoroughly tested for quality, stability, efficacy and safety. Furthermore the ability to produce and control it consistently must be established before it can be licensed for commercial use. The progress being made in this field is reviewed.