P-glycoproteins encoded by multidrug resistance type 1 (mdr1) genes mediate ATP-dependent efflux of numerous lipophilic xenobiotics, including several anticancer drugs, from cells. Overexpression of mdr1-type transporters in tumour cells contributes to a multidrug resistance phenotype. Several factors shown to induce mdr1 overexpression (UV irradiation, epidermal growth factor, tumour necrosis factor alpha, doxorubicin) have been associated with the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In the present study, primary rat hepatocyte cultures that exhibit time-dependent overexpression of the mdr1b gene were used as a model system to investigate whether ROS might participate in the regulation of intrinsic mdr1b overexpression. Addition of H2O2 to the culture medium resulted in a significant increase in mdrlb mRNA and P-glycoprotein after 3 days of culture, with maximal (approximately 2-fold) induction being observed with 0.5-1 mM H2O2. Furthermore, H2O2 led to activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, a nuclear enzyme activated by DNA strand breaks, indicating that ROS reached the nuclear compartment. Thus, extracellularly applied H2O2 elicited intracellular effects. Treatment of rat hepatocytes with the catalase inhibitor 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (2-4 mM for 72 h or 10 mM for 1 h following the hepatocyte attachment period) also led to an up-regulation of mdrlb mRNA and P-glycoprotein expression. Conversely, antioxidants (1 mM ascorbate, 10 mM mannitol, 2% dimethyl sulphoxide, 10 mM N-acetylcysteine) markedly suppressed intrinsic mdr1b mRNA and P-glycoprotein overexpression. Intracellular steady-state levels of the mdrl substrate rhodamine 123, determined as parameter of mdr1-type transport activity, indicated that mdr1-dependent efflux was increased in hepatocytes pretreated with H2O2 or aminotriazole and decreased in antioxidant-treated cells. The induction of mdr1b mRNA and of functionally active mdr1-type P-glycoproteins by elevation in intracellular ROS levels and the repression of intrinsic mdrlb mRNA and P-glycoprotein overexpression by antioxidant compounds support the conclusion that the expression of the mdr1b P-glycoprotein is regulated in a redox-sensitive manner.