The development of resistance to radiation and chemotherapeutic agents that cause DNA damage is a major problem for the treatment of breast and other cancers. The p53 tumor suppressor gene plays a direct role in the signaling of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in response to DNA damage, and p53 gene mutations have been correlated with increased resistance to DNA-damaging agents. Herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-tk) gene transfer followed by ganciclovir (GCV) treatment is a novel tumor ablation strategy that has shown good success in a variety of experimental tumor models. However, GCV cytotoxicity is believed to be mediated by DNA damage-induced apoptosis, and the relationship between p53 gene status, p53-mediated apoptosis, and the sensitivity of human tumors to HSV-tk/GCV treatment has not been firmly established. To address this issue, we compared the therapeutic efficacy of adenovirus-mediated HSV-tk gene transfer and GCV treatment in two human breast cancer cell lines: MCF-7 cells, which express wild-type p53, and MDA-MB-468 cells, which express high levels of a mutant p53 (273 Arg-His). Treating MCF-7 cells with AdHSV-tk/GCV led to the predicted increase in endogenous p53 and p21WAF1/CIP1 protein levels, and apoptosis was observed in a significant proportion of the target cell population. However, treating MDA-MB-468 cells under the same conditions resulted in a much stronger apoptotic response in the absence of induction in p21WAF1/CIP1 protein levels. This latter result suggested that HSV-tk/GCV treatment can activate a strong p53-independent apoptotic response in tumor cells that lack functional p53. To confirm this observation, four additional human breast cancer cell lines expressing mutant p53 were examined. Although a significant degree of variability in GCV chemosensitivity was observed in these cell lines, all displayed a greater reduction in cell viability than MCF-7 or normal mammary cells treated under the same conditions. These results suggest that endogenous p53 status does not correlate with chemosensitivity to HSV-tk/GCV treatment. Furthermore, evidence for a p53-independent apoptotic response serves to extend the potential of this therapeutic strategy to tumors that express mutant p53 and that may have developed resistance to conventional genotoxic agents.