Several pathophysiologic mechanisms have been proposed to explain slow-healing leg ulcers, but little is known about the growth behavior of cells in these wounds. Platelet-derived growth factor-BB applied topically to chronic wounds has shown beneficial effects, although the effects have been less pronounced than would have been expected based on studies on acute wounds. The objective of this study was to compare fibroblasts in culture obtained from chronic wounds (non-healing chronic venous leg ulcers), acute wounds and normal dermis regarding growth, mitogenic response to platelet-derived growth factor-BB and levels ofplatelet-derived growth factor alpha-receptor and beta-receptor. Fibroblasts were obtained by an explant technique and expanded in vitro using fibroblast growth medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and used for the assays at their third passage. Growth of chronic wound fibroblasts (n = 8) was significantly (p < 0.05) decreased compared with those from acute wounds (n = 10) and normal dermis (n = 5). Fibroblasts from ulcers older than 3 y grew significantly (p < 0.01) slower than those from ulcers that had been present for less than 3 y. Morphology and size of fibroblasts from the oldest chronic wounds deviated substantially from those of acute wounds and normal dermis, and resembled in vitro aged or senescent fibroblasts. Mitogenic response of chronic wound fibroblasts to human recombinant platelet-derived growth factor-BB was also reduced with ulcer age. No significant differences were found in the amount of either platelet-derived growth factor alpha-receptor or beta-receptor among the three groups. The features decreased growth related to ulcer age, altered morphology, and reduced response to platelet-derived growth factor, indicating that fibroblasts in some chronic wounds have approached or even reached the end of their lifespan (phase III). This might provide one explanation for the non-healing state and therapy resistance to topical platelet-derived growth factor-BB of some venous leg ulcers.