Between 1992 and 1995, we have had five virostatics available: zidovudine (AZT), didanosine (ddI), zalcitabine (ddC) (as retrotranscriptase nucleosidic antagonists, RTNA), acriflavine (ACF), and hydroxy-methyl-ellipticine (HEL), as respectively a DNA synthesis and structure antagonist, and a topoisomerase II inhibitor. Between 1995 and now, we have had ten virostatics the same, plus lamivudine (3TC), stavudine (d4T) as RTNA, and indinavir (IDV), ritonavir (RTV) and saquinavir (SQV) as protease inhibitors. We first conducted a phase I-like study concerning the ratios of the drug numbers in combinations over the numbers available. The optimal model for the study was that of four virostatics selected out of the ten. The four virostatic combinations were applied in short (3 week) sequences, differing each others by drug rotation. The patients were, before treatment, nine at the phase of AIDS, one at the A3 stage. They presented a very rapid decrease of viral load (VL) which became undetectable at PCR, being first below 200 RNA copies/mL, then below 20. We call this condition 'minimum residual disease' as HIV1 persistence is revealed by virus rebounds, reversible, and probably induced by cofactors. The frequency of the latter selection is due to the very frequent (each 3 weeks) VL evaluations. The last part of the VL exponential curve which the minimum residual disease represents, is almost horizontal and quasi insensitive to the powerful virostatic model described above, though no resistance has appeared at the combination or sequence levels. Thus we propose to add phases of: a) reinforcements by virostatics, adding two more ones to the four of the model; and b) treatment complement by active immunotherapy phases: the most adapted immunomodulator is the combination of the peptidic cytokine, tuftsine, and of its antipeptidase, bestatine If they are not available, another interleukine, able to help restoring the AIDS disturbed immunologic system, interleukin 2, could be tried, as it has induced beneficial effects at very small doses by subcutaneous injections.