Previously, we have shown that Copenhagen (Cop) rats are highly resistant to the induction of putative preneoplastic, glutathione S-transferase 7-7 (GST 7-7)-positive liver lesions following treatment with a modified resistant hepatocyte protocol. The objective of the current study was to establish the time course for the development of resistance and examine potential resistance mechanisms in Cop rats using F344 rats as susceptible controls. Male Cop and F344 rats (n = 25), 7-8 weeks of age, were initiated with diethylnitrosamine (200 mg/kg) and promoted 3 weeks later with four doses of 2-acetylaminofluorene (20 mg/kg) and a 2/3 partial hepatectomy (PH). Groups of rats from each strain were killed on days 2, 4, 7, 14 and 21 post-PH, 2 h after receiving bromodeoxyuridine. Cop livers contained similar numbers of GST 7-7-positive lesions to F344 livers on days 2 and 4 post-PH. The percent volume of liver occupied by these lesions did not differ between the strains on days 2, 4 and 7 post-PH. On day 14, however, approximately 29% of the liver volume in F344 rats was occupied by lesions, whereas in Cop rats this was significantly less (approximately 9%, P < 0.001). On day 21, lesions occupied approximately 58% of F344 rat livers and only approximately 6% of Cop livers. Despite these differences, the labeling index of hepatocytes was not significantly different between the strains at any time point, either within lesions or within surrounding normal liver. Furthermore, the apoptotic indices were not different between the strains at any time. However, differences were found in the extent of lesion remodeling (redifferentiation) and in the pattern of oval cell response following PH in Cop livers. By day 14 post-PH, approximately 76% of Cop liver lesions showed evidence of remodeling, compared with only approximately 14% of F344 lesions. The oval cell response to PH was equivalent in the two strains up to day 4 post-PH but by day 7, in F344 livers there was extensive migration of these cells into the liver parenchyma, whereas in Cop livers, the response remained localized to the portal regions. These results suggest that Cop resistance occurs at the promotion stage and not the initiation stage of carcinogenesis. Resistance appears not to be due to a lower proliferation rate nor to a higher apoptotic rate within Cop lesions. Precocious remodeling and/or a diminished oval cell response, however, may contribute to the resistance of Cop rats to the growth of GST 7-7-positive hepatic lesions.