BACKGROUND: Gram-positive organisms, including vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), have emerged as major pathogens on the organ transplant service at our institution. We hypothesized that our use of vancomycin as part of routine surgical prophylaxis increased the risk of VRE colonization and infection; conversely, there was concern that failure to use vancomycin prophylaxis would increase peri-operative morbidity due to gram-positive organisms. METHODS: Renal transplant recipients (n = 88) were randomized to receive either a) vancomycin/ceftriaxone or b) cefazolin; and pancreas transplants (n = 24) to receive either a) vancomycin/gentamicin or b) cefazolin/gentamicin. Stool samples or rectal swabs were obtained for culture for enterococci within 24 h of transplantation and weekly while hospitalized. RESULTS: Enterococci were isolated on stool culture from 38 (34%) of 102 patients at the time of transplantation; 4 (11%) of the isolates were VRE. The percentage of patients who subsequently acquired VRE was low (1-7% per wk) but remained constant during hospitalization. There was no association between new VRE detection and vancomycin use for either prophylactic or therapeutic purposes. Forty-four patients (39%) had a post-operative infection with 46% of these infections due to gram-positive organisms; rates were unaffected by prophylactic vancomycin use. Pancreas transplant patients who did not receive vancomycin prophylaxis had a significantly longer initial hospitalization (p = 0.03); however, differences were not statistically significant when total length of stay (LOS) within the first 90 d of transplantation was compared. CONCLUSIONS: Vancomycin surgical prophylaxis does not appear to have an effect on VRE colonization or infection, or on rates of infection with gram-positive bacteria. Elimination of vancomycin prophylaxis in renal transplant patients may be a reasonable part of an overall program to limit vancomycin usage, although as a single measure, its impact may be minimal. Vancomycin surgical prophylaxis may be of greater importance in pancreas transplants.