Loss of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) causes genomic instability by markedly increasing the frequency of sporadic mutations in both coding and noncoding sequences. Little is known about how loss of MMR affects sensitivity to the mutagenic effect of chemotherapeutic agents. We wanted to determine how loss of MMR affects the ability of cisplatin, a known mutagen, to generate human tumor cell variants resistant to other drugs with which cisplatin is commonly combined in treatment regimens. We compared the ability of cisplatin to produce variants resistant to topotecan, gemcitabine, and paclitaxel in two pairs of MMR-proficient and -deficient cells that included sublines of the human colon carcinoma cell line HCT-116 and sublines of the human endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line HEC59. Cells were exposed to increasing concentrations of cisplatin for 1 h, and the surviving population was tested for the frequency of variants resistant to these single molecular target drugs 10 days later. The frequency of variants increased linearly with cisplatin concentration for all three drugs. Cisplatin was 2.6 +/- 0.3- (S.D.), 3.6 +/- 0.9-, and 2.3 +/- 0.1-fold more potent at producing topotecan-, gemcitabine-, and paclitaxel-resistant variants in the MMR-deficient than in the MMR-proficient HCT116 cells (P <.05 for all). Cisplatin was 1.4 +/- 0.3- and 1.4 +/- 0.4-fold more potent at generating topotecan- and gemcitabine-resistant variants in MMR-deficient HEC59 cells than in MMR-proficient HEC59+ch2 cells. Cisplatin was not more potent in generating paclitaxel-resistant variants in the MMR-deficient HEC59 cells. Spontaneous rates of generation of cells resistant to these three drugs were also measured in the HCT116 sublines. MMR-deficient HCT116 cells exhibited rates of generation of resistant variants that were 1.94- and 1.51-fold higher (P <.05) than those in the MMR-proficient cells for topotecan and gemcitabine, respectively; loss of MMR had no effect on the rate of generation of variants resistant to paclitaxel. We conclude that the loss of MMR increases the ability of cisplatin to generate variants resistant to topotecan, gemcitabine, and possibly paclitaxel and that MMR also plays a role in controlling the spontaneous rate of generation of variants resistant to topotecan and gemcitabine.