The annual multicenter studies on isolated bacteria from infections in general surgery and their antimicrobial susceptibility have been conducted in 20 facilities in Japan since July 1982. This paper describes the results obtained during period from July 1996 to June 1997. The number of cases investigated as objectives was 217 for one year. A total of 406 strains were isolated from 177 cases (81.6% of total cases). From primary infections 162 strains were isolated, and from postoperative infections 244 strains were isolated, respectively. From primary infections, anaerobic bacteria were predominant, while from postoperative infections, aerobic Gram-positive bacteria were predominant. Among aerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Enterococcus spp. was the highest. In postoperative infections, the majority of them were Enterococcus faecalis, while in primary infections, many of them were Enterococcus avium. The isolation rate of Staphylococcus spp., especially from postoperative infections, followed that of Enterococcus spp. Among anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria, Peptostreptococcus spp. and Streptococcus spp. were commonly isolated from both types of infections. Among aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Escherichia coli was the most predominantly isolated from primary infections, followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in this order, and from postoperative infections, P. aeruginosa was the most predominantly isolated, followed by E. coli and Enterobacter cloacae. Among anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Bacteroides fragilis group was the majority of isolates from both types of infections. The isolation rate of aerobic Gram-negative bacillus has decreased with time, while those of anaerobes like B. fragilis group and of aerobic Gram-positive bacteria have gradually increased in both types of infections. We found vancomycin-resistant strains of neither Staphylacoccus aureus nor Enterococcus spp.; however, the MIC of arbekacin for one of strains of S. aureus was 100 micrograms/ml. Both the MIC90's of meropenem and imipenem/cilastatin against P. aeruginosa isolated in this term were 25 micrograms/ml, which were higher than those against the strains isolated in the previous years. Compared with the isolated strains in the year 1995, progress of resistance against carbapenem antibiotics was confirmed.