OBJECTIVES: Perform a retrospective analysis of care in a hospital "isolation unit" for patients infected with multirestant bacteria (MRB), i.e. meticillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (SAMR), broad spectrum beta-lactamase secreting enterobacteria. (BLSE). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty-nine patients infected with MRB were cared for in our hospital isolation unit between January 1, 1996 and January 1, 1997. Each patient was in a separate room equipped with a sink and soap distributor, single-use towels, and individual material for patient care (stethoscope, mobile equipment, writing material, etc.). The personnel were given special training in the prevention of nosocomial infections. At admission, and in all patients, bacteriological samples to search for SAMR were acquired from nasal discharge, urine, perineal swabs, wounds and bed sores. Wound, urine and fecal samples were also taken to search for BLSE. Search for other sites of infection depended on the clinical situation. The management protocol in the isolation unit included: isolation, daily antiseptic baths, topical application of antibiotics or antiseptics on all bacteriologically proven sites of SAMR infection, selective decontamination of the digestive tract for patients with BLSE positive stools. Systemic antibiotics were given case by case. RESULTS: Mean duration of stay in the isolation unit was 17 days for SAMR infections and 14 days for BLSE infections. Mean delay to sterilization of the infected sites varied depending on the localization: 2.3 days for blood and 19.4 days for stools. Seven patients died. After leaving the isolation unit, the bacteriological course was followed in 23 patients: there were 7 cases of recurrence at least one site within a mean delay of 34.5 days. CONCLUSION: Use of isolation units provides an interesting solution for health care centers to control spread of multiresistant bacteria. Considering the endemic state of multiresistant bacteria infections in French hospitals, each health care unit should have correctly equipped facilities for isolating infected patients.