BACKGROUND: Herpes simplex infection should be searched for in patients who experience unexplained aggravation of acantholytic dermatosis. Epidermal alterations appear to play an important favoring role. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We report 6 cases of Herpes simplex infections in patients with pemphigus observed at the Ibn Rochd hospital dermatology unit, Casablanca, over a 3-year period (1995-1998). RESULTS: There were 4 men and 2 women, age range 27-76 years. Superficial pemphigus was observed in 5 cases and pemphigus vulgaris in 1. In all cases, histology showed cytopathogenic Herpes simplex infection. The Herpes simplex infection appeared when the patients were given general corticosteroid therapy at doses from 1 to 1.5 mg/kg/d for 15 days to 1 month. In two cases, the corticosteroids were associated with an immunosuppressor (azathioprine, cyclophosphamide). Cure was rapid with systemic aciclovir, achieved in 5 to 20 days. Recurrence was observed in 2 cases. DISCUSSION: Herpes simplex superinfection in patients with pemphigus is classically described but uncommonly observed. In our experience, it has become more frequent over recent years since, before 1990, we observed no cases. Its prevalence may be underestimated. The diagnosis of Herpes simplex superinfection is sometimes difficult and should be suggested in case of relapse or resistance to treatment. The Herpes virus simulates most cases of pemphigus relapse, with a preferential localization on the bullous lesions. The painful nature of the eruption is highly suggestive of Herpes simplex infection as is the presence of vesicles grouped in bouquets. Both type 1 and type 2 viruses are observed. Cure is rapidly achieved with aciclovir in 5 to 15 days. Spontaneous cure has been reported in the literature as well as recurrent herpetic infection. In two cases in the literature, the Herpes eruption was fatal due to severe herpetic hepatitis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Herpes simplex infection must be rapidly recognized in pemphigus patients so curative aciclovir treatment can be given early.