Antibiotic resistance among bacteria that are commonly encountered in the pediatric emergency department is a fact of nature. New antibiotics will provide some help, but probably only temporarily. Vaccine strategies seem to provide the best answer to resistance, and many physicians eagerly await the conjugated pneumococcal vaccines, which we can only hope to be as successful as the H. influenzae type b vaccines. Vaccines against other resistant organisms are likely further off. At this point, a major goal must be to limit the prevalence of antibiotic resistance. In considering this goal, two complementary strategies are key. The first is to avoid antibiotics in situations in which they are unlikely to provide benefit, such as for colds, URIs, and bronchitis. The second is to use narrow-spectrum antibiotics as much as possible to minimize selective pressure. Emerging evidence shows that these strategies can be effective. In a day-care center in Omaha, Nebraska, Boken et al showed that nasopharyngeal carriage of highly resistant S. pneumoniae decreased dramatically among attendees when antibiotic use decreased. In Iceland, a nationwide campaign that resulted in decreased antibiotic use was followed by a decrease in the incidence of penicillin-resistant pneumococcal infections from 20.0% to 16.9% and a decrease in the rate of carriage of resistant pneumococci among day-care-center attendees from 49% to 15%. In Finland, erythromycin resistance in Group A streptococci recovered from pharyngeal and pus samples had reached 13% in 1990. National guidelines that recommended a reduction in the use of erythromycin and other macrolide antibiotics in the treatment of outpatients with respiratory and skin infections were instituted, and by 1996, macrolide antibiotic consumption had decreased by 50%, with a similar 50% decrease in frequency of erythromycin-resistant isolates. In the absence of such national strategies, it is incumbent on physicians treating infections on a daily basis in the emergency department to consider carefully the judicious use of antibiotics.