The immune response against Leishmania donovani infection has been investigated in one resistant mouse strain (C3H/HeJ) and three susceptible mouse strains (C57BL/6, BALB/c, and B10D2/n). In order to correlate the strain-specific course of infection with the individual T cell response phenotype, the ex vivo cytokine secretion patterns of splenic lymphocytes were assessed by ELISA (interferon-y [IFN-gamma], interleukin-4 [IL-4], IL-10) or by bioassay (IL-2). The strain-dependent differences in the course of infection correlated closely with the potency of T cells to produce IFN-gamma. C3H/HeJ mice produced high amounts of IFN-gamma before and during infection, whereas susceptible mice produced low amounts of IFN-gamma early during L. donovani infection. However, C57BL/6 mice, which recovered from the infection rapidly after the acute stage, developed marked IFN-gamma response within the first 30 days of infection. In contrast, in BALB/c and B10D2/n mice, the IFN-gamma production diminished during the acute stage, and this was associated with a delay in recovery and with subsequent switching into the chronic stage. Interestingly, CD8+ T cells contributed significantly to IFN-gamma production during this phase. In contrast to IFN-y, the levels of IL-4 in response to antigen or mitogen ex vivo were always very low. Moreover, neutralization of endogenous IL-4 in vivo by treatment with soluble murine IL-4 receptor did not result in significant decreases in the parasite burdens in spleen and liver but did cause a decrease in the serum IgE level of L. donovani-infected BALB/c mice. These results confirm that in visceral leishmaniasis a Thl-dominated immune response is protective against the L. donovani parasites and, furthermore, that the capacity to produce IFN-gamma rather than the presence of IL-4 determines the efficacy of the immune response in susceptible mice. The data show that CD8+ T cells represent an important source of IFN-gamma during L. donovani infection in susceptible mice, implying a role for this cell type in healing and development of protective immunity.