MDR results from overexpression of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and multidrug resistance protein (MRP or MRP1) that function as ATP-dependent efflux pumps. Lung resistance related protein (LRP) is also supposed to be involved in MDR. The human canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter (cMOAT) gene that is responsible for the defects in Dubin-Johnson syndrome was isolated. cMOAT is homologous to MRP1 and supposed to be involved in drug resistance. Human cMOAT cDNA transfected LLC-PK1 cells, LLC/cMOAT-1, have increased resistance to vincristine (VCR), 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38), and cisplatin. The multidrug resistance (MDR)-reversing agents, cyclosporin A (CsA) and PAK-104P, almost completely reversed the resistance to VCR, SN-38 and cisplatin of LLC/cMOAT-1 cells by interacting with the substrate binding site of cMOAT. Treatment of human colorectal carcinoma SW-620 cells with sodium butyrate(NaB) induced LRP in the cells and conferred resistance to Adrianycin(ADM), VCR, VP-16, gramicidin D and taxol. Two LRP-specific ribozymes inhibited the NaB-induced expression of LRP in SW-620 cells and almost completely abolished their acquisition of the MDR phenotype. The accumulation of ADM, VCR and taxol was not decreased in NaB-treated cells, suggesting that ATP-binding cassette transporters are not involved in the MDR of NaB-treated cells. ADM was mainly located in the nuclei of untreated and the cytoplasm of NaB-treated cells. The accumulation level of ADM in the nuclei isolated from untreated cells or those from treated cells in the presence of anti-LRP polyclonal antibody was higher than that from treated cells in the absence of the antibody. Efflux of ADM from nuclei isolated from NaB-treated cells was enhanced compared with those from untreated cells and NaB-treated cells transfected with a LRP-specific ribozyme. The polyclonal antibody against LRP inhibited the enhanced efflux of ADM from nuclei isolated from NaB-treated cells. These findings indicate that LRP is involved in resistance to ADM, VCR, VP-16, taxol and gramicidin D, and has an important role in the transport of ADM from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.