Extended-spectrum b-lactamases (ESBLs) derive mainly from TEM and SHV b-lactamases. These enzymes confer resistance to all oxyimino cephalosporins and monobactams except cephamycins and carbapems. ESBLs are often encoded by large plasmids that carry resistance determinants to multiple antibiotics and spread among the members of the Enterobacteriaceae. Since the first outbreak of Klebsiella pneumoniae expressing an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase reported in 1984, nosocomial infections due to Enterobacteriaceae species which produce ESBLs have been generally recovered from patients hospitalized in intensive care units. The most frequently isolated ESBL-producing strains belong to the genus Klebsiella, Escherichia, Enterobacter and Proteus; ESBLs are rarely associated with the genus Salmonella. The first Salmonella were detected in France in 1984 (Salmonella typhimurium), in Tunisia in 1988 (Salmonella wien) and in Argentina in 1991 (Salmonella typhimurium). In 1994, 10 isolates of Salmonella typhimurium expressing an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase were isolated for the first time from 10 children hospitalized in a pediatric unit of the hospital Ibn-Rochd, Casablanca. Previous study showed that all isolates belonged the same serotype, and biotype, and showed a resistance to oxyimino beta-lactams, gentamycin, tobramycin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole but remained susceptible to tetracycline, chloramphenicol and quinolones. Oxyimino beta-lactams resistance determinant of all strains of Salmonella typhimurium was transferred by conjugation to Escherichia coli; Resistance to gentamycin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was also cotransferred. In this study, we characterized the relationship between all isolates by comparing plasmid profiles and patterns of proteins because there appear to be the more effective method for evaluating epidemiologic relationship between Salmonella species, and the protein profiles method has been used for many bacterial species. These two methods have the advantages of speed and simplicity. All isolates presented the same plasmid pattern characterised by three plasmids and the same pattern of proteins composed of 36 bands. We concluded by combining results that this outbreak involved the spread of the same strain of Salmonella typhimurium between the ten children. As this type of resistance is easily transferred by these isolates to other bacterial species, the major risk would be its transfer to Salmonella typhi.