OBJECTIVES: Since 1987, the Reference Laboratory of the Ministry of Health of Uruguay has been monitoring infections due to Streptococcus pneumoniae in patients under 5 years of age, in those between 5 to 14 years of age, and in adults. The purpose of the present study was to retrospectively analyze a 10-year collection of invasive S. pneumoniae isolates from children 5 to 14 years of age and adults. METHODS: The Reference Children's Hospital, Pasteur Hospital, and two private hospitals in Montevideo as well as four hospitals located in other representative areas of the country participated in the pneumococcal surveillance program. Based on the information available at the Microbiology Department of the Central Public Health Laboratory (demographic data, date and site of isolate, and clinical diagnosis), all patients with an invasive pneumococcal disease were recorded. Pneumonia was clinically and radiologically diagnosed and etiology was assessed by isolation of S. pneumoniae from blood or pleural fluid. All specimens were collected at the Emergency Service. Capsular serotyping and antimicrobial susceptibilities were determined for each isolate. RESULTS: During the 10-year period, 228 invasive S. pneumoniae were identified and included in the study (blood, n = 129; cerebrospinal fluid [CSF], n = 73; pleural fluid, n = 20; peritoneal fluid, n = 3; synovial fluid, n = 1; pericardic fluid, n = 1; abscess, n = 1). The most frequent clinical presentations were pneumonia (n = 71) and meningitis (n = 69). Thirty-five adults had an underlying condition including, four with malignancies, four with lupus, two with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected, and two patients in hemodialysis among others. Eighteen of the 228 patients died (7.9% fatality rate), but only four of these had an underlying condition. Eleven fatal cases were attributable to meningitis (2 children, 9 and 11 years old; 9 adults, mean age, 59 y). Four patients with pneumonia and three with sepsis died, including a splenectomized woman. Nine different capsular serotypes (1, 5, 7, 9, 12, 15, 19A, 20, and 23A) were identified among the 18 fatal cases. Resistance to penicillin, generally combined with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fluctuated annually, not surpassing 10%. CONCLUSIONS: The study results indicated that 96% of the serotypes involved in severe pneumococcal diseases were included in the 23-valent vaccine and that S. pneumoniae resistance to penicillin was moderate.