In this study, the in vitro activity of levofloxacin (LVFX) against 1,020 fresh bacterial clinical isolates was compared with the activities of a range of ofloxacin, ciprofloxacin (CPFX), ampicillin (ABPC), cefaclor, cefpodoxime, methicillin and benzylpenicillin. The clinical isolates except Vibrio cholerae were collected in Japan during 1998 from patients with infectious diseases. MICs were determined using the agar dilution method according to the recommendations by the Japan Society of Chemotherapy. Some isolates of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and coagulase negative Staphylococcus were resistant to fluoroquinolones, but the MIC50 of LVFX against MRSA was 6.25 micrograms/ml. LVFX was the most active against MRSA among the antibiotics tested. Most of Staphylococcus epidermidis strains were susceptible to the fluoroquinolones. LVFX showed greater activity against all streptococci strains compared with fluoroquinolones tested. In particular, all Streptococcus pneumoniae strains including PRSP were susceptible to LVFX at < or = 1.56 micrograms/ml. Among Enterococcus, ABPC showed superior activity against Enterococcus faecalis but many isolates of Enterococcus species were resistant to ABPC. LVFX was more active against to these Enterococcus species compared with other fluoroquinolones. On the other hand, LVFX and CPFX showed similar activity against isolates of Enterobacteriaceae. CPFX had an MIC50/90 of 0.20, 0.39 microgram/ml and LVFX showed an MIC50/90 of 0.78, 1.56 micrograms/ml against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. LVFX (MIC50/90 0.10, 0.20 microgram/ml) was more active against Acinetobacter species than CPFX (MIC50/90 0.10, 0.39 microgram/ml). Haemophilus influenzae, Branhamella (Moraxella) catarrhalis and V. cholerae were inhibited by low concentration of the fluoroquinolones tested. The MIC90 of LVFX and CPFX were < or = 0.10 microgram/ml against above three species. Some isolates of Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Campylobacter species were moderately resistant to the fluoroquinolones tested but the MIC50 of LVFX and CPFX were < or = 0.39 microgram/ml. Among anaerobes, Propionibacterium acnes was more susceptible than Peptostreptococcus species, and the MIC90 of beta-lactams and fluoroquinolones tested were < or = 0.78 microgram/ml. In conclusion, this study, performed on large number of strains, confirmed an excellent and wide spectrum antibacterial activity of LVFX compared with the fluoroquinolones and beta-lactams tested. And our results suggest that LVFX may be useful in the treatment of various bacterial infections.