Four hundred and forty pediatric patients at the age of 7 days to 15 years with various infections admitted to the Hospital within a month were examined. The biological material was inoculated to blood agar on the first days of the patient admittance to the Hospital and after the growth the organisms were isolated and identified. Antibiotic susceptibility of the isolates was assayed with the disk diffusion method. 479 strains in all were tested. The most frequent cases requiring hospitalization and antibiotic therapy were those of respiratory tract infections (54.09 per cent), urinary tract infections (26.36 per cent), cutaneous and subcutaneous fat diseases, gastrointestinal diseases and others (about 25 per cent of the cases in all). The main pathogens were Streptococcus viridans, S.aureus and S.epidermidis, as well as Enterobacteriaceae (chiefly E.coli) whose frequencies were practically equal (in 25-35 per cent of the cases). The Pneumococcus isolates amounted to 6.3 per cent. Nonfermenting bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter) and some representatives of Enterobacteriaceae (Citrobacter, Serratia, Morganella) were isolated from 7 per cent of the patients. The frequency of Klebsiella and Enterobacter was about 11 per cent. The main pathogens were tested for their susceptibility to amoxycillin/clavulanic acid, ampicillin, oxacillin and gentamicin. The least active antibiotic was ampicillin. 88.8 per cent of the E.coli isolates and 100 per cent of the Klebsiella, P.mirabilis, Morganella, Citrobacter, Enterobacter and Serratia isolates were resistant to it. 53.2 per cent of the Streptococcus isolates including 64.5 per cent of the Pneumococcus isolates were as well resistant to ampicillin. 59.5 per cent of the Streptococcus isolates (mainly S.viridans and Enterococcus) was susceptible to oxacillin, 22.2 per cent of them being moderately susceptible. 62.5 per cent of the Pneumococcus isolates and 78.1 per cent of the Staphylococcus isolates were also susceptible to oxacillin. The highest susceptibility of the isolates was that to amoxycillin/clavulanic acid, i.e. 90.1 per cent of the strains, 79.9 per cent of them being highly susceptible. All the isolates of Citrobacter, Serratia and Morganella and some isolates of P.aeruginosa, Acinetobacter, Enterobacter, Klebsiella and E.coli were resistant to amoxycillin/clavulanic acid. As for the latter 5 organisms their susceptibility to amoxycillin/clavulanic acid was comparable with that to gentamicin. The susceptibility of the Streptococcus and Staphylococcus isolates to amoxycillin/clavulanic acid was significantly much higher than that to oxacillin, gentamicin and ampicillin: 93 per cent of the Streptococcus isolates (62.7 per cent of the Pneumococcus isolates) and 90.7 per cent of the Staphylococcus isolates.