It is generally accepted that the more antibiotics we use, the faster bacteria will develop resistance. Further it has been more or less accepted that once an antibiotic is withdrawn from the clinic, the resistance genes will eventually disappear, [table: see text] since they will no more be of any survival value for the bacterial cell. However, recent research has shown that after a long time period of exposure to antibiotics, certain bacterial species may adapt to this environment in such a way that they keep their resistance genes stably also after the removal of antibiotics. Thus, there is reason to believe that once resistance has developed it will not even in the long term be eradicated. What then can we do not to increase further the already high level of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in animals? We should of course encourage a prudent use of these valuable drugs. In Sweden antibiotics are not used for growth promoting purposes and are available only after veterinary prescription on strict indications. Generally, antimicrobial treatment of animals on individual or on herd basis should not be considered unless in connection with relevant diagnostics. The amounts of antibiotics used and the development of resistance in important pathogens should be closely monitored. Furthermore, resistance monitoring in certain non-pathogenic intestinal bacteria, which may serve as a reservoir for resistance genes is probably more important than hitherto anticipated. Once the usage of or resistance to a certain antibiotic seems to increase in an alarming way, steps should be taken to limit the usage of the drug in order to prevent further spread of resistance genes in animals, humans and the environment. Better methods for detecting and quantifying antibiotic resistance have to be developed. Screening methods must be standardized and evaluated in order to obtain comparable and reliable results from different countries. The genetic mechanisms for development of resistance and spread of resistance genes should be studied in detail. Research in these areas will lead to new ideas on how to inhibit the resistance mechanisms. So far, it has been well established that a heavy antimicrobial drug selective pressure in overcrowded populations of production animals creates favourable environments both for the emergence and the spread of antibiotic resistance genes.