The aim of this study was to evaluate the drug susceptibility of 100 Enterococcus spp. strains isolated from patients hospitalized in State Clinical Hospital No 1 in Warsaw. All strains were identified (API 20 STREP) and their susceptibility to antibiotics was tested (ATB STREP) in automatic ATB system. Additionally, PYRase activity, beta-lactamase production (in nitrocefin test), MICs for vancomycin and teicoplanin (E test), HLAR--high level aminoglycoside resistance and susceptibility to vancomycin, teicoplanin, piperacillin and piperacillin/tazobactam (disc diffusion method) were determined. E. faecalis ATCC 29212 was used as the control strain. Fifty E. faecalis, 45 E. faecium, 2 E. casseliflavus, 2 E. durans and 1 E. avium strain were cultured. All strains were PYRase-positive and beta-lactamase-negative. Ten isolates demonstrated intermediate susceptibility to vancomycin (6--E. faecalis and 4--E. faecium). One E. faecalis strain was intermediately susceptible to both glycopeptides. One E. casseliflavus strain showed low-level resistance to vancomycin, but this strain was susceptible to teicoplanin--phenotype Van C. HLAR strains were found among 31 E. faecalis and 40 E. faecium strains. 48 E. faecalis strains were susceptible to piperacillin and 49 to piperacillin/tazobactam. Whereas, 41 E. faecium were resistant to both these drugs. Thirty six per cent of isolates were resistant to penicillin and ampicillin, 73% to erythromycin, 87% to tetracycline, 89% to lincomycin and 56% to nitrofurantoin. Some discrepancies were noticed between the results of different methods applied for susceptibility testing--ATB system, E test and disc diffusion. These discrepancies concerned HLAR detection and susceptibility to glycopeptides determination. The best methods were: disc-diffusion for HLAR detection and E test for determination of resistance to vancomycin and teicoplanin. Increasing resistance to antimicrobial agents is observed in clinical Enterococcus spp. isolates cultured in our laboratory, especially in E. faecium strains. It is necessary to control the dissemination of multiresistant Enterococcus spp. strains in hospital wards.