Hormones and antibiotics are important remedies in animal reproduction. Compared to other areas of application, hormones are probably more used than antibiotics. The quantities of hormones applied in cattle reproduction are largely dependent on whether these drugs are extensively used for pharmaceutical control of breeding or not. Diseased animals should be treated both from an animal welfare point of view and to restore their production capacity. The treatment should be based on an accurate diagnosis. Some of the treatment methods used in animal reproduction do not seem to be well documented. When using antibiotics, it should be known that an infectious agent is present which will be susceptible to therapy. The use of hormones and antibiotics to solve or mask managerial problems should be avoided. Ideally, fertility and health traits should be included in a breeding programme. Therefore, all diagnoses and treatments performed should be recorded and these data made available for breeding purposes. Manipulation of the breeding cycle by pharmaceutical means should not disturb the natural reproductive performance of animals being progeny tested. Animal health and fertility should be improved by selection and good management rather than by extensive use of hormones and antibiotics. Cases of inappropriate use of pharmaceutical preparations have created a general scepticism among people concerning the use of hormones and antibiotics in modern farming. Evidence of increasing resistance to antibiotics in bacteria infecting humans has focused on the role that anti-microbial drug use in food-producing animals plays in the emergence of resistant bacteria. There is also a concern about possible residues in animal products. Further, the consumers have a growing interest in animal health and animal welfare issues, and they have ethical concerns regarding the use of hormones and antibiotics, in particular, as performance enhancers. In Europe, the number of farmers growing organically cultivated foodstuffs is increasing, and according to the regulations for organic farming, the use of hormones and antibiotics is limited. Even though the proper use of hormones and antibiotics does not have any known negative effect on animal welfare or public health, the consumers' concerns have to be taken into account in livestock production.