BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE STUDY: Calcification is a major cause of failure of bioprosthetic heart valves derived from glutaraldehyde-crosslinked bovine pericardium or porcine aortic valve (PAV) cusps. Recently, we have shown that ethanol pretreatment of PAV cusps prevents calcification in animal models. METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study we showed that ethanol pretreatment was equally effective in preventing calcification of glutaraldehyde-crosslinked bovine pericardium (control Ca2+ = 121.16+/-7.49 microg/mg tissue; ethanol-pretreated Ca2+ = 2.95+/-0.78 microg/mg). Furthermore, other low-molecular weight alcohols such as methanol and isopropanol were also effective in mitigating calcification of PAV cusps. Storage of ethanol-pretreated cusps in glutaraldehyde before implantation allowed partial return of calcification, suggesting a role for ethanol-glutaraldehyde interactions in preventing calcification. However, when ethanol-pretreated cusps were stored in ethanolic glutaraldehyde up to one month, the anti-calcification effect of ethanol persisted. The conditions whereby PAV cusps were crosslinked in pure, non-aqueous, alcoholic glutaraldehyde solutions were also examined. The crosslinking was equivalent to the standard aqueous glutaraldehyde crosslinking as indicated by thermal denaturation temperatures (Td) obtained by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and resistance to collagenase digestion. However, these cusps had lower water content and showed a marked decrease in spin-lattice relaxation times (T1) obtained by solid-state proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Moreover, these cusps calcified heavily in the 21-day rat subdermal implants. Thus, alcohol treatment during glutaraldehyde crosslinking was not useful. CONCLUSION: Glutaraldehyde storage after ethanol pretreatment aggravates calcification; moreover, alcoholic-glutaraldehyde crosslinking solutions are not beneficial for anti-calcification. Ethanol pretreatment of glutaraldehyde-pretreated bovine pericardium prevents its calcification.