BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Although the rate of isolation of Campylobacter from stool specimens in Taiwan is similar to those in other developed countries, Campylobacter bacteremia has rarely been reported in Taiwan, and the patterns of antimicrobial susceptibility of blood isolates to various antimicrobial agents remain unknown in the Taiwanese population. The purpose of this study was to determine the clinical characteristics of patients with Campylobacter infection in a university hospital in Taiwan and the antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of the Campylobacter isolates. METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed medical records of all patients with Campylobacter bacteremia treated in a university hospital between January 1991 and March 1999. Minimum inhibitory concentrations of 13 antimicrobial agents to 10 stored blood isolates were determined using the E-test. RESULTS: Approximately half (52%) of the 21 patients had chronic liver disease and one-quarter had hepatobiliary or gastrointestinal malignancies. Thirteen (62%) patients had conditions that were associated with gastroenteritis. Other clinical manifestations associated with Campylobacter infection included cellulitis, perinatal sepsis, peritonitis, vascular catheter-related infection, and primary bacteremia. The duration of illness was generally short: approximately half (52%) of the 21 patients had fever lasting for only 1 day. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the 10 isolates revealed that most of the blood isolates were resistant to erythromycin and nalidixic acid (100% and 90%, respectively), while the rate of cross-resistance between erythromycin and azithromycin was 70%, and that between nalidixic acid and ciprofloxacin was 67%. CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest that Campylobacter bacteremia should be included in the differential diagnosis of patients with chronic liver disease or malignancies involving the hepatobiliary system or gastrointestinal tract who present with fever and gastroenteritis. Clinicians in Taiwan should be alert to the high rate of resistance of Campylobacter isolates to macrolide and quinolone antibiotics.