Candida species other than Candida albicans frequently cause nosocomial infections in immunocompromised patients. Some of these pathogens have either variable susceptibility patterns or intrinsic resistance against common azoles. The availability of a rapid and reproducible susceptibility-testing method is likely to help in the selection of an appropriate regimen for therapy. A flow cytometry (FC) method was used in the present study for susceptibility testing of Candida glabrata, Candida guilliermondii, Candida krusei, Candida lusitaniae, Candida parapsilosis, Candida tropicalis, and Cryptococcus neoformans based on accumulation of the DNA binding dye propidium iodide (PI). The results were compared with MIC results obtained for amphotericin B and fluconazole using the NCCLS broth microdilution method (M27-A). For FC, the yeast inoculum was prepared spectrophotometrically, the drugs were diluted in either RPMI 1640 or yeast nitrogen base containing 1% dextrose, and yeast samples and drug dilutions were incubated with amphotericin B and fluconazole, respectively, for 4 to 6 h. Sodium deoxycholate and PI were added at the end of incubation, and fluorescence was measured with a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson). The lowest drug concentration that showed a 50% increase in mean channel fluorescence compared to that of the growth control was designated the MIC. All tests were repeated once. The MICs obtained by FC for all yeast isolates except C. lusitaniae were in very good agreement (within 1 dilution) of the results of the NCCLS broth microdilution method. Paired t test values were not statistically significant (P = 0.377 for amphotericin B; P = 0.383 for fluconazole). Exceptionally, C. lusitaniae isolates showed higher MICs (2 dilutions or more) than in the corresponding NCCLS broth microdilution method for amphotericin B. Overall, FC antifungal susceptibility testing provided rapid, reproducible results that were statistically comparable to those obtained with the NCCLS method.