Fever is frequent in neutropenic patients and often related to infection. Two major concepts, have contributed to the marked mortality decrease of those patients by the end of the 1960s: firstly, the duration and severity of neutropenia were the most important variables linked to infection and secondly, prompt administration of broad-spectrum antimicrobials empirically, was life-saving. At the same time it was universally admitted that a careful daily examination of all portals of entry for micro-organisms was mandatory and that laboratory and imaging investigations were needed at regular intervals, keeping constantly in mind the individual type and stage of immunosuppression. Through many studies, paediatricians contributed markedly in standardisation of management of febrile neutropenic patients. Neutropenic patients are not equally prone to infections, partly due to the underlying cancer, chemotherapy and co-morbidity factors. Neutropenic children are not only vulnerable to bacteria, fungi and viruses commonly encountered in adults, but also to common viruses and bacteria. Very few studies included a viral work-up. Epidemiological new trends are observed: Gram-positive bacteria and fungi are on the rise. Simplifying and shortening antibiotic regimens were made possible because new potent antibiotics were launched. Since the mid-1980s, many paediatric centres commonly discharge patients before complete bone marrow recovery, provided that patients meet certain low-risk criteria and do not exhibit any clinical or biological evidence of bacterial infection. However, a few prospective randomised studies have been conducted for assessing the safety of early antibiotics discontinuation and safe early discharge. The choice of oral agents up to now was complicated by the reluctance using fluoroquinolones in children. New challenges are numerous in terms of diagnostic tools, detection of epidemiological trends and emerging pathogens, identification and control of nosocomial threats including drug resistance, assessment of the real impact of prophylaxis, evaluation of new agents, the need for more accurate risk scoring systems, outpatient management and the necessity for an optimal use of resources.