The SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program began in January, 1997, and is designed to monitor nosocomial and selected community acquired infections via a worldwide surveillance network of sentinel hospitals distributed equally by geographic location and size. Three sites in Brazil - Rio de Janeiro, Florianopolis, and Sao Paulo - participated in the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program stet. Rank order of occurrence and antimicrobial susceptibility of pathogenic species causing bloodstream infections, pneumonia, wound or skin and soft tissue infections, and urinary tract infections (UTI) in hospitalized patients were determined by collecting consecutive isolates over a specified period of time. Antimicrobial susceptibilities of Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis obtained from outpatients with respiratory tract infections were also evaluated. The isolates for the evaluated infections were: 1) bloodstream - 20 consecutive isolates in each calendar month during a 12-month period; 2) pneumonia - 100 consecutive isolates over a 6 month period; 3) wound or skin and soft tissue - 50 consecutive isolates over a 3 month period; and 4) UTI - 50 consecutive isolates over a 3 month period. Each hospital also contributed, over a 6 month period, consecutive clinically significant outpatient isolates (one isolate per patient) of S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis that were considered pathogens in respiratory tract infections. Data collected for each isolate included species identification, antimicrobial susceptibility profile, date of isolation, and specimen type. Molecular studies were performed on selected isolates. A total of 1,241 bacterial strains were obtained; the majority were cultured from hospitalized patients, while 139 were fastidious organisms from community acquired respiratory tract infections. Gram-negative bacilli and S. aureus were the predominant pathogens, and Enterobacter spp. was a significant pathogen. The predominance of P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp. and the significant levels of resistance to most agents are of major concern, as is the epidemic rate of ESBL-producing strains of Klebsiella spp. and E. coli in Brazil, which is much higher than rates seen in other areas of the world. Resistance among P. aeruginosa and the Enterobacteriaceae to fluoroquinolones, oxacillin-resistant S. aureus, and penicillin- and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole-resistant pneumococci were other significant resistance issues identified in this surveillance study. Vancomycin resistance among the enterococci, S. aureus, and S. pneumoniae was not identified. This benchmark study will serve as comparison for future surveillance studies, including the ongoing SENTRY program, to monitor emerging resistance trends in Brazil. The high rates of resistance observed in this study underscore the need for global surveillance and local action.