OBJECTIVE: To update the recommendations for antiretroviral therapy (ART) in adult HIV-infected persons according to the new scientific advances and the existence of new antiretroviral drugs in the last two years. METHODS: The ART recommendations have been condensed by a panel of experts from the Spanish AIDS Study Group (Grupo de Estudio de Sida-GESIDA) of the Spanish Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology Society (SEIMC) and from the Clinical Advisory Panel (CAP) of the Secretariat of the Spanish National Plan on AIDS (SPNS) of the Ministry of Health. Three levels of evidence have been established depending if the data came from randomized and controlled studies, from cohort or case-control studies or from descriptive studies and expert opinions, for that purpose we have reviewed the advanced in HIV pathophysiology and results of efficacy (clinical, virologic and immunologic) and security (toxicity) from clinical trials involving ART lasting at least 12 months, from cohort studies and pharmacokinetic and security data of antoiretrovirico drugs, presented in international conferences or published in biomedical journals in the last two years. In each situation we have established either to recommend or to consider or not recommend ART. RESULTS: Nowadays, ART consistent of at least three drugs constitutes the election therapy for chronic HIV infection, since it delays clinical progression, increases significantly the survival and diminishes hospital admissions and associated costs. The decision to start ART must be based upon three elements: presence or absence of symptoms, plasma virica load and CD4+ cells counts. Thus, in asymptomatic cases with a high CD4+ cells count (> 500/microliter) and low virica load (< 10,000 copies/ml by branched DNA bDNA or < 20,000 copies/ml by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction [RT-PCR] or nucleic acid sequence based amplification [NASBA]) we recommend to delay ART. In symptomatic patients we recommend to start it, and in asymptomatic patients, we could recommend or consider ART initiation depending on the risk of progression, established by the virica load and the CD4+ cells count. In any case, if therapy is started, the objective must be to reach an indetectable virica load (< 50 copies/ml). The adherence to ART plays a key role for its initial moment and for the duration of the antiviral response. ART can achieve a restoration of cellular immunity inb the advanced patients. There are few therapeutic options in failing patients due to cross-resistance. Resistance studies can be useful in this setting. The toxicity (lypodistrophy) is a new and limiting factor of ART which requires to look for new therapeutic options. ART criteria for acute infection, pregnancy, post-exposure prophylaxis and when to use resistance testing are discussed. CONCLUSIONS: In this moment, there is a more conservative attitude towards starting ART than in previous recommendations in which a virus eradication was considered. On the other hand, the high number of disposable drugs, the more sensitive monitorization methods (plasma virica load) and the possibility of performing resistance studies make therapeutic strategies more dynamic and individualized for each patient and situation. In any case, it is mandatory to ensure a perfect adherence to ART from the patients.