The chronically recidivist vulvo-vaginal candidiasis is one of the most stubborn problematic diagnosis in the dermatology and gynaecology ward. Prognosis and therapy are primarily determined by the causative micro-organism and the interaction of the fungal species with the currently available antifungal agents. Objective of the study was the investigation of vaginal yeast isolates from patients with chronically recidivist vaginal candidiasis against 8 antifungal agents with the aim of optimising the standard therapy with azole antifungal agents and assessment of alternative therapy schemes. 55 clinical isolates (Dermatology, Charite) of 40 patients were tested by microdilution according to DIN 58940-84. Species differentiation and identification was performed by Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR). In the result Candida glabrata was the predominant causative agent for the recidivist vaginal candidiasis. MIC-mode values for C. glabrata were: fluconacole 32 micrograms/ml, itraconacole 1 microgram/ml, ketoconacole 1 microgram/ml, amphotericine B, voriconacole 0.03 microgram/ml, amphotericin B 0.5 microgram/ml, terbinafine 128 micrograms/ml, cicloproxolamine 4 micrograms/ml, 5-fluorocytosine 0.03 microgram/ml. Some strains of Patients with suboptimal introductory low doses of fluconacole showed increasing of MIC in course of therapy. Parallel resistance with itraconacole was observed in all these cases. Consecutively isolated strains could be clearly and reliably identified by FTIR. In conclusion of most importance is the initial dose adapatation of the drug used, e.g. for fluconacole 800/d p.o., when C. glabrata is the causative agent. Low dose fluconacole therapy is always unsuccessful in recurrent vaginal candidiasis and induces secondary resistance. Demonstrated high susceptibility of voriconacole, amphotericine B an 5-fluorocytosine particularly for C. glabrata may indicate of an anitmycotic therapy potential unconsidered regarding to dermatological indication up to now.