The aim of this prospective randomized multicenter study was to find out if there is one or several promising regimens containing lansoprazole with various combinations of antibiotics which have a high eradication rate of Helicobacter pylori, few side-effects, good patient compliance, and relative low cost if possible. Two hundred and ninety-seven patients with H. pylori positive duodenal ulcer were enrolled and randomly allocated into one of the five treatment groups: 1) group A: received lansoprazole 30 mg once daily for 2 weeks plus amoxicillin (AM) 500 mg and metronidazole (MZ) 500 mg twice daily for one week in the first week; 2) group B: the AM in group A was replaced by clarithromycin (CM) 250 mg; 3) group C: the MZ in group A was replaced by CM 250 mg; 4) group D: the AM and CM in group C was used for 2 wk; 5) group E: the CM in group D was doubled to 500 mg twice daily. All patients received endoscopies pre- and 4-6 weeks post termination of treatment. H. pylori was detected by culture, histology and rapid urease test (CLO test). 13C-urea breath test was performed if the patients refused the second endoscopy. The E-test was adopted to evaluate the MZ and CM resistance of H. pylori. Totally, 253 patients completed the study. The eradication rate of groups A, B, C, D and E were 75%, 80%, 78%, 92%, and 96%, respectively. The eradication rate of group E was significantly higher than that of groups A, B, or C. There were no significant differences of eradication rates between the groups D and E. Sixty-seven cases (28.8%) were MZ-resistant. The difference of eradication rates between MZ-S and MZ-R patients was significant in group A (85.3% vs. 42.9%) and in the combination of groups A and B (83.8% vs. 59.4%). Good compliance (defined as taking > 90% of medications) was seen in more than 90% of cases in each group. Triple therapy containing lansoprazole 30 mg once daily, AM 500 mg and CM 250 mg twice daily for two weeks is a promising regimen which reaches a high eradication rate, avoids MZ resistance, and has very good patient compliance at an acceptable cost.