The in-vitro antibacterial activity of cefpiramide was compared with those of 15 other broad-spectrum cephalosporins. A total of 440 clinical strains of bacteria, including 9 bacterial species, were isolated from our hospital in 1998. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of cefpiramide and five other antibiotics were determined for each species, using the agar-dilution method. The MIC of cefpiramide for Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae was higher than those of three other third-generation cephalosporins, (ie, cefoperazone, ceftazidime, and ceftriaxone). Fifty-one percent (26/51) of Enterobacter cloacae isolates were resistant to cefpiramide. Cefoperazone/sulbactam and cefepime had greater activity against E. cloacae (resistance, 3.9% and 19.6%, respectively) than cefpiramide. Cefpiramide was more active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (resistance rates, 12%) than cefoperazone, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, aztreonam, and cefepime. Cefpiramide-resistant P. aeruginosa strains were resistant to ceftazidime, but 27% of ceftazidime-resistant strains were susceptible to cefpiramide; 15.3% of cefpiramide-resistant S. maltophilia strains were also susceptible to ceftazidime, but 50% of ceftazidime-resistant strains were still susceptible to cefpiramide. Cefoperazone/sulbactam was the most active agent against Acinetobacter baumannii, showing a resistance rate of 2%. Ampicillin/sulbactam, ceftazidime, and cefpiramide were the second most active agents, and about 50% of the tested strains were susceptible to these three antibiotics. Cefpiramide had an activity comparable to that of all tested beta-lactams against oxacillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MIC90, 2 microg/ml). Against Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae, cefpiramide had good activity, with an MIC90 concentration at which 90% of the strain was inhibited of 1 microg/ml and 0.5 microg/ml, respectively. These results indicated that cefpiramide was more active against glucose non-fermenting bacteria than against Enterobacteriaceae, and was very active against oxacillin-susceptible Staphylo-coccus aureus, S. pneumoniae, and H. influenzae. Thus, cefpiramide may be a good choice of drug for the treatment of patients with infections with glucose non-fermenting bacteria and community acquired infections.