The ability of spleen cells from poly A:poly U-treated mice to inhibit murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) replication in confluent monolayer cells of secondary mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) cultured at 37 and 40 degrees C was investigated. When spleen cells from BALB/c mice injected 48 h earlier with poly A:poly U were added to MEFs infected 2 h previously with MCMV, 37% less plaques were observed than in cultures containing control cells. Of interest, the poly A:poly U-induced antiviral activity at the elevated temperature (40 degrees C) resulted in a further drop to 61% in MCMV-induced plaques compared to those of the normothermic (37 degrees C) cultures. The antiviral function of spleen cells induced by poly A:poly U was evident in the supernatant fluid when cultured for 48 h at 37 degrees C. MCMV-induced plaques were reduced to 52 and 5% of controls in the plaque assays performed at 37 and 40 degrees C, respectively. Supernatant fluids generated at 40 degrees C, however, inhibited MCMV replication only when incubated at 40 degrees C. No direct inhibitory effect of the supernatant fluids on MCMV was evident; rather, inhibition was effected directly on the MEFs. The NK cell fraction of spleen cells from poly A:poly U-treated mice alone showed only a slight inhibitory effect at 40 degrees C. However, in the presence of the supernatant fluid from poly A:poly U-exposed spleen cells, the antiviral activity of NK cells was significantly increased both at 37 and 40 degrees C. The cellular source of the culture fluid showing poly A:poly U-induced antiviral activity appeared to be in the T-cell population. It was completely neutralized by monoclonal anti-IFN gamma antibody but not by anti-IFN beta, anti-IL4, anti-transforming growth factor, or anti-prostaglandin E2. In conclusion, these data document the ability of spleen cells from poly A:poly U-treated mice to inhibit MCMV replication and this activity is potentiated by hyperthermic conditions. The antiviral function of poly A:poly U-treated spleen cells appeared to be due mainly to the action of IFN gamma produced by T cells. The enhanced antiviral activity by hyperthermia appeared to be related to the action of IFN gamma rather than its production.