A series of O-alkylated derivatives of erythromycin (EM) has been prepared and their biological properties were evaluated. Among them, clarithromycin (CAM, 6-O-methylerythromycin) exhibits most potent in vitro and in vivo antibacterial activities, higher acid-stability than EM and favorable pharmacokinetic properties as an antibiotic. CAM was originally synthesized via methylation of 2'-O,3'-N-bis(benzyl-oxycarbonyl)-N-demethylerythromycin in low yield, because of the less selectivity of 6-O-methylation. The selective 6-O-methylation was achieved using the erythromycin 9-oxime derivative as a key intermediate. By the further investigation on the protective groups of 9-oxime and desosamine moiety, the production process of CAM on an industrial scale has been established via methylation of 2',4''-O-bis(trimethylsilyl)erythromycin 9-[O-(1-isopropoxycyclohexyl)oxime] in more than 45% overall yield. CAM has the same antibacterial spectra as EM and is active against aerobic Gram-positive bacteria, some Gram-negative bacteria, anaerobic bacteria, Mycoplasma and Chlamydia. The activity of CAM against clinical isolates was 1 to 16 times higher than that of EM. The efficacies of CAM were 6 to 15 times superior to those of EM against systemic infections due to Gram-positive bacteria in mice. CAM also showed more potent therapeutic efficacies than EM against respiratory tract infections caused by S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae. CAM was well absorbed after oral administration, and its distribution to various tissues was significantly higher than that of EM in animals. The level of CAM in the lung was extremely high, which accounted 69 times that of EM. CAM was found to be distributed predominantly in the alveolar wall, especially in the alveolar epithelial cells, by microautoradiography. After oral administration in human, the serum level and urinary excretion of CAM were 5 and 20 times higher than those of EM, respectively. The major and active metabolite of CAM in human, (14R)-14-hydroxyclarithromycin, existed in significant quantity in the serum and urine, suggesting that the metabolite contributes to the excellent clinical efficacy of CAM. This paper describes the synthesis, structure-activity relationships, antibacterial activities, metabolism and clinical efficacies of CAM, a new macrolide antibiotic.