In order to assess the vulnerability of the inner ear, auditory function and morphology of the inner ear were compared between adult budgerigars and adult guinea pigs. Budgerigars have been considered to have an excellent auditory-vocal system. Two experimental conditions were produced in each species; one by acoustic hyperstimulation (1500 Hz, 120 dBSPL) for 96 hours, the other by administration of kanamycin (200 mg/kg) for 7 weeks. Measurement of auditory evoked potentials (AEP) and observation of hair cells by electron microscopy were performed both immediately and 14 days after exposure. In the acoustic hyperstimulation experiment, AEPs of budgerigars showed less damage and better recovery than those of guinea pigs, probably because of morphological differences between the two species in hair and supporting cells. Electron microscopic observation on the budgerigars showed that a small part of the hair cell area was damaged and that regeneration of hair cells had occurred in this area 14 days after exposure. Such observations in guinea pigs revealed that outer hair cells had been damaged and replaced by supporting cells 14 days after exposure. In the kanamycin administration experiment, AEPs showed the same degree of damage and recovery in both species. This suggests that blood supply and drug transport to the inner ear are almost the same although the structure of the inner ear differs markedly between the two species. Electron microscopic observation did not show an apparent regeneration of hair cells 14 days after administration in the budgerigars. Guinea pigs had a tendency to show progressive damage of both auditory function and inner ear morphology even after the cessation of administration. Regeneration of hair cells in the budgerigar differed under both experimental conditions, suggesting that there is a difference in the mode of auditory disturbance between acoustic hyperstimulation and administration of kanamycin. In conclusion, resistance to acoustic hyperstimulation is higher in the avian inner ear than in the mammalian inner ear, while resistance to administration of kanamycin does not differ significantly between the two species.