ermK instructs bacteria to synthesize an erythromycin-inducible 23S rRNA methylase that confers resistance to the macrolide, lincosamide, and streptogramin B antibiotics. Expression of ermK is regulated by transcriptional attenuation, in contrast to other inducible erm genes, previously described, which are regulated translationally. The ermK mRNA leader sequence has a total length of 357 nucleotides and encodes a 14-amino-acid leader peptide together with its ribosome binding site. Additionally, the mRNA leader sequence can fold in either of two mutually exclusive conformations, one of which is postulated to form in the absence of induction and to contain two rho factor-independent terminators. Truncated transcription products ca. 210 and 333 nucleotides long were synthesized in the absence of induction, both in vivo and in vitro, as predicted by the transcriptional attenuation model; run-off transcription in vitro with rITP favored the synthesis of the full-length run-off transcript over that of the 210- and 333-nucleotide truncated products. Northern (RNA) blot analysis of transcripts synthesized in vivo in the absence of erythromycin indicated that transcription terminated at either of the two inverted complementary repeat sequences in the leader that were postulated to serve as rho factor-independent terminators; moreover, no full-length transcripts were detectable in the uninduced samples. In contrast, full-length (ca. 1,200-nucleotide) transcripts were only detected in RNA samples synthesized in vivo in the presence of erythromycin. Full-length transcripts formed in the absence of induction from transcriptional readthrough past the two proposed transcription terminators would fold in a way that would sequester the ribosome binding site together with the first two codons of the ErmK methylase, reducing its efficiency in translation. This feature could therefore provide additional control of expression in the absence of induction; however, such regulation, if operative, would act only secondarily, both in time and place, relative to transcriptional control. Analysis by reverse transcriptase mapping of in vivo transcripts from two primers that bracket the transcription terminator responsible for the 210-nucleotide truncated fragment supports the transcriptional attenuation model proposed and suggests further that the synthesis of the ermK message is initiated constitutively upstream of the proposed terminator but completed inductively downstream of this site.