The purpose of this study was to determine how changes in ventilation rate and in the entry route of air pollutants into the respiratory tract (nose versus mouth breathing) affected the respiratory tract uptake and penetration of inhaled gaseous and particulate pollutants associated with automobile emissions. Experiments were performed with female beagle dogs exposed while standing at rest or while exercising on a treadmill at 5 km/hour and a 7.5 percent grade. Dogs were exposed to nitrogen dioxide at concentrations of 1 and 5 parts per million (ppm), to formaldehyde at 2 and 10 ppm, and to an aerosol of ammonium nitrate particles (0.3 micron mass median aerodynamic diameter) at 1 mg/m3. Total respiratory system uptake and effects on breath time, expired tidal volume, fractional expiration time, minute ventilation, respiratory gas exchange, ventilation equivalents for oxygen and carbon dioxide, and dynamic pulmonary resistance and compliance were measured in exercising and resting dogs exposed for two hours to 5 ppm nitrogen dioxide and 10 ppm formaldehyde in combination with 1 mg/m3 of ammonium nitrate particles. Regional penetration of pollutants through oral and nasal airways and pollutant uptake in the lung were measured in a separate group of six tracheostomized dogs standing at rest while being exposed to nitrogen dioxide, formaldehyde, and ammonium nitrate particles. Hypercapnic stimulation was used to modify ventilation rates in the tracheostomized dogs while pollutant penetration and uptake were measured. Dogs exposed to 5 ppm of nitrogen dioxide at rest tended to breathe more rapidly (p less than 0.05) and more shallowly (a nonsignificant trend) than dogs exposed to purified air. The changes observed were similar in direction, but of smaller magnitude, to changes observed when the same dogs were exposed during exercise to ozone at 0.6 ppm in a separate study. Rapid-shallow breathing was not observed when the dogs were exposed during exercise to 5 ppm nitrogen dioxide. Dogs exposed to a mixture of 10 ppm formaldehyde and 1 mg/m3 ammonium nitrate particles during exercise showed a shift to larger tidal volume breathing, but the response was much less pronounced than the slow-deep breathing pattern response observed in a separate study of dogs exposed to 10 ppm formaldehyde alone. The total respiratory system uptake of formaldehyde from the formaldehyde and ammonium nitrate mixture was larger than that measured for 10 ppm of formaldehyde alone in another exercise and exposure study.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)