Similar to guinea pig macrophages and human monocytes, macrophages from the peritoneal cavity of thioglycolate pretreated A/J mice are permissive for growth of Legionella pneumophila. In contrast, macrophages from BDF1 mice are not permissive for L. pneumophila. Lymphocytes from A/J and BDF1 mice proliferated in response to Legionella Ag but guinea pig lymphocytes did not. Also, splenocyte cultures from A/J mice treated with either Con A or Legionella vaccine produced supernatants which induced A/J macrophages to restrict Legionella growth, but guinea pig splenocyte culture supernatants obtained after stimulation with L. pneumophila vaccine did not induce Legionella growth restriction activity by guinea pig macrophages. Murine rIFN-gamma but not rIFN-alpha markedly inhibited growth of Legionella in A/J mouse macrophages and monoclonal anti-IFN-gamma antibody neutralized the anti-Legionella activity of culture supernatants from A/J mouse splenocytes responding to Legionella Ag. From these data, IFN-gamma appears to be an important factor in anti-Legionella activity of Ag-activated mouse splenocyte culture supernatants. Cyclosporin A, when given to either A/J or BDF1 mice, reduced the proliferation responses of splenocytes to T cell mitogens and also decreased the IFN production of A/J spleen cells to Legionella Ag. In addition, drug treatment decreased the resistance of A/J mice to Legionella infection as shown by an increase in the number of viable bacteria in the liver. However, injection of drug treated mice with lymphokine-rich splenocyte culture supernatant reconstituted the resistance of these animals. These results suggest an important role for lymphocyte activation and lymphokine production in the resistance of A/J mice to Legionella infection. The greater resistance of BDF1 mice, however, may result from nonpermissive macrophages and responsive lymphocytes. In the case of guinea pigs, susceptibility to Legionella infections may result from both the permissive nature of the macrophages and the relatively unresponsive nature of the lymphocytes in these animals.