Transcriptional expression of the puc operon in Rhodobacter sphaeroides is highly regulated by both oxygen and light. The approximately 600 bp of DNA upstream of the 5' ends of the two puc-specific transcripts encompasses two functionally separable cis-acting domains. The upstream regulatory region (URS) (-629 to -150) is responsible for enhanced transcriptional regulation of puc operon expression by oxygen and light. The more proximal upstream region (downstream regulatory region [DRS]), containing putative promoter(s), operator(s), and factor binding sites (-150 to -1), is involved in unenhanced transcriptional expression of the puc operon under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Thus, the DRS shows normal derepression of puc operon expression when cells are shifted from aerobic to photosynthetic growth conditions in terms of percent change but does not show the potential range of expression that is only observed when elements of the URS are present. Because of these observations, we have made a distinction between anaerobic control (describing the shift) and oxygen control (describing the magnitude of derepression). Promoter(s) and/or activator function(s) of the puc operon is associated with a 35-bp DNA region between -92 and -57. Homologous sequences at -10 to -27 and -35 to -52 appear to involve additional regulatory elements: mutations at -12 (A to C) and -26 (G to A) result in partial derepression of puc operon expression under conditions of high aeration. Both point mutations require the upstream regulatory region (-629 to -150) to be present in cis for partial derepression of puc operon transcription under aerobic conditions. Immediately upstream of the promoter and/or activator region are overlapping consensus sequences for IHF (integratin host factor) and FNR (fumarate nitrate reductase) (-105 to -129). This region appears to be essential for enhanced expression of the puc operon. Thus, these two regulatory domains (URS and DRS) appear to involve approximately seven unique regulatory elements. In addition, the data reveal a direct interaction between the URS (-629 to -150) and the DRS (-150 to -1).