Paludism can occur quite easily in pregnant women in endemic zones, above all those who are primiparous or in their 2nd or 3rd terms. The onset of paludal attacks can be serious for both the mother and the child. That is to say, besides the obviously imperative therapeutic action, a prophylaxis is also a necessity. The use of antipaludial substances at our disposal has been complicated during the last few years as a result of chloroquine-resistance extension. Besides a few nuances of kinetic nature observed in pregnant women, a good knowledge of teratogenous or embryotoxic effects is necessary. But this remains fragmentary. Among the principal antipaludial medications is quinine (Q), reported to be abortifacient but in reality it is not: it is often poorly tolerated by the mother (hypoglycemia), but is not responsible for abnormalities in children, except under large doses. Chloroquine (CQ), considered to be without harmful effects, can be used in women without large restrictions, even if toxic effects have been observed in animals. The pyrimethamine-sulfanilamide (P-S) combination contains two substances which are a potential risk. Nevertheless, experiments have never showed harmful effects in pregnant women, particularly when under cover of a joint prescription of folinic acid. Proguanil is without doubt the only molecule which can be used without restriction. Two new medications, quinoline methanol, Mefloquine (MQ) and Halofantrine (HF) are contra-indicated for lack of experimentation and because of some abnormalities observed at high doses in animals. Artemisinine and amino-8-quinoline are contra-indicated, and cyclines are strongly inadvised. From the practical point of view, the present use of antipaludial medication in pregnancy should take into account the surrounding risk, namely that of paludism and of treatments. Curatively, Q remains a serious treatment in any form. In CQ-sensitive zones CQ is usable unreservedly in simple attacks. In CQ resistance zones the use of Q seems preferable to that of Fansidar proposed by certain people. MQ and HF, although contra-indicated, have already been employed without inconvenience. By way of prevention, it is important first of all to avoid all leisure stays in endemic zones. If travel is unavoidable or for indigenous people, a chemoprophylaxis, judged according to the local risk of impaludation, is desirable: CQ in sensitive zones, PG+CQ in resistant zones, P-S, as proposed by some people, is normally contra-indicated; MQ and HF are contra-indicated. Protection against nocturnal mosquito bites is still strongly applied (Mosquito net, repellents, insecticides).