The treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with high dose cytosine arabinoside (ara-C) results in short-lived complete response rates of 30-50%. We have previously shown that entry of myeloid leukemic cells into S phase can be accelerated in vitro through the use of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (rhGM-CSF), resulting in enhancement of ara-C-mediated cytotoxicity. In order to evaluate the in vivo biological and clinical effects of this strategy in patients with high risk AML, we treated three patients with either refractory or relapsed disease with a continuous infusion of rhGM-CSF (0.45 micrograms/kg/h aglycoprotein) for 18 h, followed by the institution of high dose ara-C and continuation of rhGM-CSF throughout the 4 day duration of ara-C treatment. Prior to therapy, no patient had detectable levels of circulating rhGM-CSF, and there was no evidence of GM-CSF receptor occupancy in leukemic myeloblasts. After 18 h of rhGM-CSF therapy, all patients had biologically active levels of circulating rhGM-CSF (7.9-12.0 ng/ml), and two patients showed a significant degree of leukemic GM-CSF receptor occupancy without evidence of GM-CSF receptor down-regulation. A significant rise in the S phase fraction of leukemic myeloblasts was observed at 18 h of rhGM-CSF treatment in all three patients (29-56% increment). The toxicity of combined rhGM-CSF/ara-C therapy included pericarditis and cerebellar degeneration in one patient, fever and mild renal dysfunction in two patients, and mild hepatic dysfunction in all three patients. Each patient showed a transient rise in the absolute neutrophil and blast count during rhGM-CSF/ara-C administration, followed by profound, but clinically tolerable, myelosuppression. No patient developed clinical evidence of leukostasis. There was one death related to pericardial tamponade, one death related to refractory disease, and one clinical and cytogenetic remission. These results suggest that exogenously administered rhGM-CSF is capable of rapidly mobilizing leukemic cells into S phase in vivo and theoretically should be useful in overcoming kinetic resistance to ara-C. Clinical trials of this regimen in patients with high risk AML who are not already pharmacologically resistant to ara-C are warranted.