An oligomycin-sensitive F1F0-ATPase isolated from bovine heart mitochondria has been reconstituted into phospholipid vesicles and pumps protons. this preparation of F1F0-ATPase contains 14 different polypeptides that are resolved by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under denaturing conditions, and so it is more complex than bacterial and chloroplast enzymes, which have eight or nine different subunits. The 14 bovine subunits have been characterized by protein sequence analysis. They have been fractionated on polyacrylamide gels and transferred to poly(vinylidene difluoride) membranes, and N-terminal sequences have been determined in nine of them. By comparison with known sequences, eight of these have been identified as subunits beta, gamma, delta, and epsilon, which together with the alpha subunit form the F1 domain, as the b and c (or DCCD-reactive) subunits, both components of the membrane sector of the enzyme, and as the oligomycin sensitivity conferral protein (OSCP) and factor 6 (F6), both of which are required for attachment of F1 to the membrane sector. The sequence of the ninth, named subunit e, has been determined and is not related to any reported protein sequence. The N-terminal sequence of a tenth subunit, the membrane component A6L, could be determined after a mild acid treatment to remove an alpha-N-formyl group. Similar experiments with another membrane component, the a or ATPase-6 subunit, caused the protein to degrade, but the protein has been isolated from the enzyme complex and its position on gels has been unambiguously assigned. No N-terminal sequence could be derived from three other proteins. The largest of these is the alpha subunit, which previously has been shown to have pyrrolidonecarboxylic acid at the N terminus of the majority of its chains. The other two have been isolated from the enzyme complex; one of them is the membrane-associated protein, subunit d, which has an alpha-N-acetyl group, and the second, surprisingly, is the ATPase inhibitor protein. When it is isolated directly from mitochondrial membranes, the inhibitor protein has a frayed N terminus, with chains starting at residues 1, 2, and 3, but when it is isolated from the purified enzyme complex, its chains are not frayed and the N terminus is modified. Previously, the sequences at the N terminals of the alpha, beta, and delta subunits isolated from F1-ATPase had been shown to be frayed also, but in the F1F0 complex they each have unique N-terminal sequences.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)