Resistance to Leishmania major in mice is associated with the generation of distinct CD4+ Th subsets, termed TH1 and TH2. To define the factors contributing to the genesis of these Th cells, we first investigated when these subsets developed following L. major infection. Lymph node (LN) cells collected 3 days after infection of BALB/c mice secreted IL-4 and IL-5 in vitro, but little IFN-gamma, whereas LN cells from a resistant strain, C3H/HeN, secreted IFN-gamma and no IL-4 or IL-5. Cytokine production was eliminated in both cases by in vivo or in vitro depletion of CD4+ cells, but not after depletion of CD8+ cells. Similar responses were observed after inoculation of killed promastigotes or a soluble leishmanial Ag preparation. These data indicate that the development of Th1- and Th2-like responses can precede lesion formation and does not require a live infection. We next investigated whether IFN-gamma was important in the differentiation of Th1 and Th2 cells. C3H/HeN mice have previously been shown to be susceptible to leishmanial infection after treatment with anti-IFN-gamma. We confirmed this observation and found that the abrogation of resistance was associated with enhanced production of IL-4 and IL-5, and decreased production of IFN-gamma by cells taken from these mice. Conversely, LN cells from BALB/c mice inoculated with parasites plus IFN-gamma produced significantly higher levels of IFN-gamma, and decreased levels of IL-4 and IL-5, than mice infected with parasites alone. Finally, we determined if IFN-gamma might augment vaccine induced immunity. We found that s.c. immunization with soluble leishmanial Ag, the bacterial adjuvant, Corynebacterium parvum and IFN-gamma could protect mice against L. major infection, and that this protection was associated with induction of Th1 responses. From these data we conclude that levels of IFN-gamma at the time of infection or immunization dramatically alters the type of response elicited: high levels of IFN-gamma favor Th1 type responses, whereas low levels promote a Th2 response.