Bacteriological and clinical studies on cefodizime (CDZM, THR-221), a new cephem developed by Hoechst AG and Roussel Uclaf, were carried out and the results are summarized below: 1. Against Gram-positive bacteria, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes and Streptococcus pneumoniae, antibacterial activities of CDZM were similar to those of cefotaxime (CTX), cefazolin, cefotiam and piperacillin. Against Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Serratia sp., antibacterial activities of CDZM were similar to that of CTX, and superior to those of other tested antibiotics. Especially against Haemophilus influenzae and Branhamella catarrhalis, it showed an excellent antibacterial activity. 2. Although the clinical efficacy was poor in 1 patient with sepsis caused by Salmonella marcescens and in another with cervical lymphadenitis, in 5 patients with upper respiratory tract infection, 4 patients with bronchitis, 6 patients with bronchopneumonia, 18 patients with pneumonia, 5 patients with urinary tract infection and 1 patient with enteritis, the clinical efficacy was excellent or good and the efficacy rate was 95.1% (39/41) including excellent efficacies in 25 cases. 3. Bacteriologically, all identified causative bacteria were eradicated except for 1 case of Salmonella sp., thus the eradication rate was 97.4% (38/39). Especially S. pneumoniae in 10 cases, H. influenzae in 12 cases and B. catarrhalis in 3 cases were eradicated totally. 4. Adverse reactions were studied in 46 cases, and digestive symptoms were observed in 9 cases (diarrhea 5 cases, loose stools 4 cases). Eruption and vascular pain were observed in 1 case each. As digestive symptoms in 9 cases were mild, the treatment were not suspended. In laboratory test values, elevation of GOT, elevation of GPT, elevation of bilirubin, and eosinophilia were observed in 1 case each. Influences on blood coagulation parameters were studied. No change was observed between the beginning and the end of the treatment. From above results, we have concluded that CDZM is a useful and safe antibiotic in pediatrics, administered at a daily dose of 20 mg/kg divided into 3 or 4 doses and administered intravenously.