Suramin, a polysulfonated naphtylurea, has been shown to bind to a wide variety of tumor growth factors, and to exhibit anti-proliferative effects on several cell lines. We have followed the suramin-induced (100 micrograms/ml) evolution of morphological, biochemical and electrophysiological changes in HT29-D4 human colonic adenocarcinoma cell clone as a function of culture time. After 5 days of culture in the presence of the drug the cells were polarized and exhibited apical brush border and tight junctions. The polarization process of carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) in the apical membrane domain was achieved after 8 days of treatment, while the correct localization of HLA class-I molecules in the basolateral membrane domain occurred after 14 days of culture in the presence of suramin. Spontaneous potential difference (PD) and transepithelial resistance (Rt) were recorded from the 9th day of treatment and reached maximum values at day 15 (PD = 3 mV; RT = 450 omega cm2), giving evidence that the differentiation process triggered by suramin concerned virtually all cells in the monolayer. Untreated cells were consistently found to be electrically inactive. Finally, from day 10 of suramin treatment, the lysosomal system was perturbed including accumulation of large autophagic vacuoles and, later, typical lamellar inclusion bodies. These structures were never seen when cells were induced to differentiate in suramin-containing serum-free medium. Moreover, similar perturbations of the lysosomal system could be obtained by adding BSA in the suramin-containing defined medium, suggesting that the lysosomal storage disorder occurring upon suramin treatment was due to endocytosis of suramin-BSA complexes. We conclude that lysosomal impairment due to the presence of BSA in the culture medium did not prevent HT29-D4 cells from differentiating and that it was not an early event which could be involved in the mechanism of action of suramin. However, this perturbation might account for some of the toxic effects occurring during chronic suramin treatment in humans.