In the subjects of 835 strains of 37 clinically isolated microbial strains, which were separated and identified among materials collected from patients with various infections and which were sent from medical therapeutic institutions throughout Japan in 1990, for the purpose of examining the antimicrobial activity of cefpiramide (CPM), its minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), together with those of other cephem antibiotics, was determined, and the following conclusions were obtained. 1. Microbial strains in which no CPM-resistant strains emerged were Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Anaerobic Gram-positive cocci. 2. In comparison with reports by many researchers at the former half of the 1980s, microbial stains suggesting an increase in resistance to CPM were Staphylococcus aureus, Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas cepacia, Pseudomonas putida, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and Haemophilus influenzae, but also in other microbial strains the resistance to CPM was observed in high ratios. 3. Among strains used in the test, methicillin-resistant S. aureus, cephamycin and oxime type cephalosporin-resistant Gram-negative bacilli of Enterobacteriaceae, and new quinolone-resistant microbes were observed in high ratios; therefore, it was considered that CPM could not exert sufficient antimicrobial activities to these strains because of many resistant strains being complicated among these "CPM-resistant strains". 4. It was discussed that "the resistance mechanism observed throughout beta-lactam drugs as a while and the study themes in the dimension including social circumstances where resistant strains emerged", as pointed out by the authors in 1989, increased the significance of these days in the evaluation of timecourse changes in microbes resistant to specific drugs including CPM. 5. There are many unfavorable conditions in the antimicrobial activities of CPM to clinically isolated strains in recent years. However, it was jointly confirmed that CPM maintained effective antimicrobial activities to the majority of clinically isolated strains. Furthermore, when it was additionally considered that CPM was one of not many cephem drugs having persistent blood levels, a conclusion was drawn that CPM was one of clincally useful cephem drugs even at present.