We reidentified our laboratories' collections of 57 enterococcal isolates previously classified as Enterococcus avium by the API Rapid Strep identification system (Analytab Products, Plainview, N.Y.) with the identification criteria recommended by Facklam and Collins (R. R. Facklam and M. D. Collins, J. Clin. Microbiol. 27: 731-734, 1989). Thirty isolates were identified as true E. avium, 25 isolates were identified as E. raffinosus, and 2 isolates were identified as E. pseudoavium. E. raffinosus could be differentiated from E. avium on the basis of penicillin susceptibility, as follows: MIC for 50% of E. raffinosus isolates tested (MIC50), 32 micrograms/ml; MIC90, 64 micrograms/ml (range, 4 to 64 micrograms/ml); E. avium MIC50, 1 microgram/ml; MIC90, 2 micrograms/ml (range, 0.5 to 2 micrograms/ml). No strains produced detectable beta-lactamase. Penicillin-binding protein (PBP) analysis of all E. raffinosus isolates demonstrated the unique pattern reported previously (M. D. Collins, R. R. Facklam, J. A. E. Farrow, and R. Williamson, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 57:283-288, 1989); however, a number of newly identified PBPs were noted. Of 25 isolates, 13 had an additional PBP of 77 kDa (designated PBP 6*), while all isolates possessed a 52-kDa PBP (PBP 7) and a 46-kDa PBP (PBP 8). The presence or absence of PBP 6* did not correlate with penicillin susceptibility; however, PBP 7 demonstrated many features suggestive of low penicillin-binding affinity and may represent a possible mechanism for the relative resistance of this species to penicillin, although this hypothesis remains speculative since attempts to develop a penicillin-hypersusceptible E. raffinosus mutant were unsuccessful. E. raffinosus isolates were significantly more likely to exhibit high-level resistance to kanamycin than E. avium strains were (P < 0.001; chi-square); however, no strains demonstrated high-level resistance to gentamicin. No trend toward increasing penicillin resistance was noted among this collection of E. avium and E. raffinosus isolates collected over the past 35 and 14 years, respectively. Relative resistance to penicillin may be a helpful differentiating feature between E. avium and E. raffinosus when assessment of raffinose metabolism is not possible or is indeterminant.