Single strain regression analysis was performed on PDM II medium for E. faecalis with 10, 30 and 120 micrograms gentamicin disks using E. faecalis, strain ATCC 29212 as the reference. This method permits the calculation of zone diameters corresponding to different MIC values for different disk contents. The lack of discrimination between normal low-level resistant strains and high-level resistance using the 10 micrograms disk was confirmed. However, both the 30 micrograms and 120 micrograms disks seemed to provide a separation of the normal low-level gentamicin-resistant population from strains with increased resistance. Since the 30 micrograms disk is used routinely in some countries, there should be no need for an extra high content disk in these laboratories. This was confirmed when 96 clinical isolates of E. faecalis were analysed and the results of routine disk diffusion tests were compared with the MIC values. Two of the strains showed high-level gentamicin resistance (greater than 2000 mg/l) and produced no zone of inhibition. The other 94 isolates showed gentamicin MIC values between 4-16 mg/l, and 72 of the MIC results were 8 mg/l. The zone diameters for these strains ranged between 15 and 25 mm with a mean of 18.2 and a median value of 18 mm. In order to include statistical considerations of the zone size populations for setting of breakpoints, a study of gentamicin zone size distributions was performed for several bacterial species. Inhibition zone diameter values around the 30 micrograms gentamicin disk for 2079 clinical isolates of E. faecalis, 2268 S. aureus, 3201 E. coli and 547 strains of P. mirabilis from different years were plotted as histograms. Tests for agreement with a Gaussian distribution showed that the histograms were slightly peaked and skewed towards higher zone values. Parametric and non-parametric statistical tests were compared and the results showed that means and medians were very similar and that parametric fractile estimations at the lower end of the histogram populations were conservative and could be used in view of a slightly lower rate of false resistance. The 1% parametric fractile of 12 mm was selected as a suitable breakpoint for the identification of normal, low-level resistant isolates of E. faecalis using the standardized disk test of the Swedish Reference Group for Antibiotics.