Ornithine decarboxylase (ODC, EC 4.1.1.17) expression is subject to negative feedback regulation by the polyamines. The results of previous studies favor either translational or post-translational regulation. To facilitate further analysis of the mechanism by which polyamines affect ODC expression we have used a cell line (L1210-DFMOr) that overproduces ODC. This cell line was isolated by selection for resistance to the antiproliferative effect of the ODC inhibitor alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO). These cells respond similarly to polyamine depletion and repletion as do their wild-type counterparts. When L1210-DFMOr cells were grown in the presence of 20 mM DFMO (i.e., when their polyamine content was reduced to an extent that still permitted a normal growth rate) ODC represented 4-5% of the soluble protein synthesized. After transfer of the cells to a medium lacking DFMO (i.e., when their polyamine pools were repleted), the rate of incorporation of [35S]methionine into ODC was one order of magnitude lower. Since this difference in incorporation of radioactivity into ODC remained the same irrespective of the pulse-label time used (between 2 and 20 min) it is likely to represent a true difference in ODC synthesis rate. Consequently, the pulse-label experiments cannot be explained by rapid degradation of the enzyme during the labeling period. The difference in ODC synthesis rate was not accompanied by a corresponding difference in the steady-state level of ODC mRNA. Analyses of the distribution of ODC mRNA in polysome profiles did not demonstrate any major difference between cells grown in the absence or presence of DFMO, even though the ODC synthesis rate differed by as much as 10-fold. However, the distribution of the ODC mRNA in the polysome profiles indicated that the message was poorly translated. Thus, most of the ODC mRNA was present in fractions containing ribosomal subunits or monosomes. Inhibition of elongation by cycloheximide treatment resulted in a shift of the ODC mRNA from the region of the gradient containing ribosomal subunits to that containing mono- and polysomes, indicating that most of the ODC mRNA was accessible to translation. Taken together these data lend support to a translational control mechanism which involves both initiation and elongation.