Cells of the monocyte lineage act as a major reservoir for HIV, and ways of enhancing the resistance of mononuclear phagocytes to HIV replication would be useful for delaying the onset of AIDS in infected individuals. Seif et al. (J. Virol. 65:664, 1991) have recently shown the possibility of obtaining stable antiviral expression (SAVE), directed against three nonretroviral RNA viruses, and normal cell viability in a significant percentage of murine BALB/c 3T3 cells transformed with an IFN-beta expression plasmid under the control of the 0.6-kb XhoII-NruI promoter region of the murine H-2Kb MHC gene. In the present paper, we show that it is possible to establish SAVE in human promonocytic cells. Cells of the human promonocytic U937 line were stably transfected with a human IFN-beta expression plasmid carrying the neo- and human IFN-beta-coding sequences under the control of the H-2Kb promoter fragment previously used in murine cells. After selection with G418, two transformed clones were isolated that released small amounts of human IFN-beta into the culture medium, without affecting the expression of CD4 and leucocyte function-associated Ag-1 differentiation Ag. The presence of construct-derived IFN-beta mRNA was demonstrated by polymerase chain reaction amplification of cDNA, and the level of 2-5A synthetase, one of the major IFN-induced antiviral proteins, was shown to be constitutively increased. These clones were less permissive for HIV-1 than control clones transformed with the neo gene only. The antiviral state could be modulated by anti-IFN-beta antibodies, in that the continuous presence of antibodies in the culture medium abolished the enhanced resistance to HIV-1 replication, whereas the withdrawal of the antiserum restored the antiviral state, indicating that it did indeed result from the constitutive synthesis of human IFN-beta. These results demonstrate the possibility of restricting HIV-1 replication in human promonocytic cells by establishing SAVE. Further exploration of this method as a possible approach to somatic cell gene therapy of HIV infection appears worthwhile.