In order to survey antibacterial activities of ofloxacin (OFLX) against 1,440 bacterial strains isolated from patients with community-acquired infections in 1987 and 1990, minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of the drug as well as those of other new quinolones and oral cephems were determined. The following conclusions were reached. 1. Comparison of the MIC distribution for strains isolated in 1987 with those in 1990 suggested a tendency toward an increase in the frequency of OFLX-resistant isolates with the passage of time of Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli, Citrobacter spp., Klebsiella ssp., Enterobacter spp., Proteus vulgaris, Morganella morganii, Providencia spp., and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus. Most common elevations of MIC values against these bacteria were observed in MIC80 and MIC90 values, while no significant alteration was observed in MIC50 values. However, MIC50's of OFLX against Serratia marcescens and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were relatively high for strains isolated in both 1987 and 1990. Most of the OFLX-resistant strains of S. aureus seemed to be methicillin-resistant (MRSA). Furthermore, MIC80 of OFLX against coagulase-negative staphylococci was high in strains isolated in both 1987 and 1990. 2. Susceptibility of Streptococcus spp. was evaluated only in strains isolated in 1990. The results were comparable to those reported by others in the early 1980s. 3. Bacteria which showed no or infrequent emergence of OFLX-resistant strains even in 1990 were Proteus mirabilis, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Campylobacter spp. and Peptostreptococcus spp. 4. Recently isolated strains from patients with community-acquired infections showed a tendency toward an increase of the frequency of OFLX-resistant strains among many bacteria. However, the bacteria which contained high percentages of OFLX-resistant strains except for MRSA were so-called less-virulent bacteria, and in the other bacteria elevations of MIC values were only observed in MIC80 and MIC90. These results suggested that OFLX preserved a potent antibacterial activity against bacteria which were major causative pathogens in community-acquired infections.