Since 1979, Ikemoto et al. have been retrospectively surveying the sensitivity of major species of bacteria isolated from patients with urinary tract infections to various antibacterial agents and antibiotics. Their findings for the past year are reported below. A total of 825 clinical strains of bacteria was investigated. Of this total, Gram-positive bacteria accounted for 28.0% (231 strains) and Gram-negative bacteria for 72.0% (594 strains). Taxonomically, Escherichia coli accounted for 34.7% (286 strains), Enterococcus faecalis for 14.3% (118), Pseudomonas aeruginosa for 11.0% (91), Klebsiella pneumoniae for 7.8% (64), and coagulase-negative staphylococci for 7.3% (60). Sensitivity spectra of these major bacteria to various drugs were as follows. 1. E. faecalis was sensitive to parenteral imipenem (IPM) and ampicillin and oral vancomycin. It was also sensitive to ofloxacin (OFLX) and ciprofloxacin (CPFX), which are new quinolones. Some strains were only slightly sensitive to second and third generation cephems cefmenoxime (CMX) and cefuzonam (CZON) aminoglycosides amikacin (AMK) and arbekacin (HBK), and erythromycin which is a macrolide. 2. Staphylococcus aureus was sensitive to dicloxacillin (MDIPC) which is a penicillin drug, cefotiam (CTM) which is a cephem, IPM, minocycline (MINO), and HBK. A fairly large number of strains were only slightly sensitive to cefazolin (CEZ), OFLX and CPFX. 3. Coagulase-negative staphylococci were sensitive to MDIPC which is a penicillin derivative, cephems CTM and CZON, IPM, HBK, clindamycin (CLDM) and MINO. Some strains, however, were only slightly sensitive to a majority of these drugs. 4. E. coli was sensitive to CTM, CMX, latamoxef (LMOX), ceftazidime (CAZ), CZON, and flomoxef (FMOX), all of which are second or third generation cephems. It was also sensitive to IPM, a carbapenem, carumonam (CRMN), a monobactam, and new quinolones, OFLX and CPFX. 5. K. pneumoniae was sensitive to cephems, viz. CTM, CAZ, CZON, FMOX and cefixime, CRMN which is a monobactam, IPM, a carbapenem and new quinolones, OFLX and CPFX. Some strains were only slightly sensitive to CTM, cefmetazole cefoperazone (CPZ), and FMOX. 6. Citrobacter freundii was sensitive to CRMN which is a monobactam, and new quinolones, OFLX and CPFX. Many strains were only slightly sensitive to cephems, viz. CEZ, CTM, CPZ and CAZ. 7. Enterobacter cloacae was sensitive to gentamicin and AMK which are aminoglycosides, but showed a bimodal pattern of sensitivity to CPZ, CAZ and CZON, all of which are cephems, and to quinolones, OFLX and CPFX.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)