The molecular mechanism of reversion induced by 5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) replication-dependent mutagenesis in mammalian cells was studied. Murine cells with single mutant copies of the E. coli gpt gene integrated chromosomally as part of a shuttle vector were mutagenized with BrdU, and GPT+ revertants were selected. Thirteen mutant cell lines (each of which had a gpt gene that varied from the wild-type gene by a different GC----AT base transition in the coding region) were mutagenized, and only four were found to be effectively reverted. All revertant gpt genes that were analyzed had reverted via AT----GC base transition at the original site of mutation, thus demonstrating that replication-dependent mutagenesis by BrdU causes AT----GC transitions. The nine cell lines that were nonrevertible by BrdU replication-dependent mutagenesis could be mutated by this protocol to ouabain resistance as effectively as the four revertible lines, indicating that the nonrevertible lines were susceptible to such mutagenesis. Thus, differences among the cell lines in frequencies of HATr revertants generated by BrdU replication-dependent mutagenesis could not be attributed to differences in general susceptibility of the lines to the mutagenic protocol. The revertible and nonrevertible lines could not be separated according to the position of the original GC----AT transition in the gpt coding region. However, there was evidence that the DNA base sequence flanking the site of mutation affected the susceptibility of that site to BrdU replication-dependent mutagenesis. For example, six of the cell lines tested had gpt genes in which the mutant T residue was immediately adjacent on its 3' side to an A residue, and all six were found to be nonrevertible by BrdU replication-dependent mutagenesis. Furthermore, a target AT base pair flanked by GC base pairs in opposite orientation and either immediately adjacent to or one base removed from the target site on both the 5' and 3' sides appeared to have an increased susceptibility to BrdU replication-dependent mutagenesis.