Isolated bacteria from respiratory tract infections were collected since 1981 in cooperation with institutions located throughout Japan, and have been investigated for their sensitivities to various antibacterial agents and antibiotics and reported by IKEMOTO, et al. Relationships between these isolates and backgrounds of the patients were also studied each year. These results are discussed in detail in this report. In 20 institutions around the entire Japan from October 1991 to September 1992, 631 strains of bacteria were isolated mainly from sputa of 529 patients with respiratory tract infections and tentatively determined to be etiological agents. MICs of various antibacterial agents and antibiotics against 96 strains of Staphylococcus aureus, 112 strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae, 111 strains of Haemophilus influenzae, 114 strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (non-mucoid), 41 strains of Moraxella subgenus Branhamella catarrhalis, 39 strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (mucoid), Klebsiella pneumoniae and some others, were determined, and the drug sensitivities of these strains were determined except for the strains that had been killed during transportation: 1. S. aureus. S. aureus strains for which MICs of methicillin were higher than 4 micrograms/ml (methicillin-resistant S. aureus) accounted for 58.3% and the frequency of the drug resistant bacteria increased over previous year's 42.5%. As shown by the MICs, arbekacin was active as vancomycin against all the strains on S. aureus. 2. S. pneumoniae: Benzylpenicillin among the penicillins showed a potent activity against S. pneumoniae. Cefuzonam, cefmenoxime, cefozopran and cefotaxime among the cephems showed excellent antimicrobial activities against S. pneumoniae. Imipenem; a penem antibiotic, showed the most potent activity with MIC80 of 0.03 micrograms/ml. 3. H. influenzae: Activities of all drugs were excellent against H. influenzae strains tested. Ampicillin showed MIC80 of 1 micrograms/ml against H. influenzae. Cefuzonam showed the most potent activity among cephems, it completely killed all bacteria at MIC 0.06 micrograms/ml. Cefotaxime and cefmenoxime showed next most potent activities with MIC80s of 0.06 micrograms/ml. The antimicrobial activity of ofloxacin was equivalent to those of cephems. 4. P. aeruginosa (mucoid). Ciprofloxacin and tobramycin showed the most potent activities against P. aeruginosa (mucoid), and their MIC80s were 4 micrograms/ml. 5. P. aeruginosa (non-mucoid): Similarly, ciprofloxacin and tobramycin showed the most potent activities against P. aeruginosa (non-mucoid) with MIC80 of 2 micrograms/ml. Comparing to activities against P. aeruginosa (mucoid), all the drugs tested showed lower activities against P. aeruginosa (non-mucoid). 6. K. pneumoniae: The activities of all drugs except for penicillins were very high against K. pneumoniae.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)