Current thrust in controlling the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) focuses on antiviral drug development targeting the infection and replication of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the causative agent of AIDS. To date, treatment of AIDS has relied on nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors such as AZT, ddI, and ddC, which eventually become ineffective upon the emergence of resistant mutants bearing specific nucleotide substitutions. The Anti-AIDS Drug Screening Program of the NCI conducts and coordinates a high-capacity semi-robotic in vitro screening of synthetic or natural compounds submitted by academic, research and pharmaceutical institutions world-wide. About 10,000 synthetic compounds are screened annually for anti-HIV activity. Confirmed active agents are subjected to in-depth studies on range and mechanism of action. Emerging from this intense screening activity were a number of potentially promising categories of nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) with structural diversity but strong and reproducible anti-HIV activity. Over 2500 active compounds were evaluated for their inhibitory activity against a panel of both laboratory and clinical virus isolates in the appropriate established cell line or fresh human peripheral blood leukocyte and macrophage preparations. Out of these, 40 agents could be placed structurally in nine categories with an additional 16 unique compounds that share the characteristics of NNRTI. These NNRTIs were shown to inhibit reverse transcriptase enzymatically using homopolymeric or ribosomal RNA as templates. NNRTIs demonstrated similarity in their inhibitory pattern against the HIV-1 laboratory strains IIIB and RF, and an AZT-resistant strain; all were inactive against HIV-2. These compounds were further tested against NNRTI-resistant HIV-1 isolates. NNRTI-resistant HIV-1 isolates were selected and characterized with respect to the change(s) in the viral reverse transcriptase nucleotide sequence. Also, differential cross-resistance or sensitivity patterns to NNRTIs were studied in detail among NNRTI-resistant mutants. When tested in combination with AZT, all of the NNRTI's uniformly exhibited synergistic inhibition of HIV-1, suggesting that combination antiviral therapy of NNRTIs with AZT may be therapeutically promising for AIDS treatment.