RP 59500 is a new injectable streptogramin composed of two synergistic components (quinupristin and dalfopristin) which are active against erythromycin-susceptible and -resistant gram-positive pathogens. The present experiments compared the therapeutic efficacy of RP 59500 with that of vancomycin against experimental endocarditis due to either of two erythromycin-susceptible or two constitutively erythromycin-resistant isolates of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. RP 59500 had low MICs for the four test organisms as well as for 24 additional isolates (the MIC at which 90% of the isolates were inhibited was < 1 mg/liter) which were mostly inducibly (47%) or constitutively (39%) erythromycin resistant. Aortic endocarditis in rats was produced with catheter-induced vegetations. Three-day therapy was initiated 12 h after infection, and the drugs were delivered via a computerized pump, which permitted the mimicking of the drug kinetics produced in human serum by twice-daily intravenous injections of 7 mg of RP 59500 per kg of body weight or 1 g of vancomycin. Both antibiotics reduced vegetation bacterial titers to below detection levels in ca. 70% of animals infected with the erythromycin-susceptible isolates (P < 0.05 compared with titers in controls). Vancomycin was also effective against the constitutively resistant strains, but RP 59500 failed against these isolates. Further experiments proved that RP 59500 failures were related to the very short life span of dalfopristin in serum (< or = 2 h, compared with > or = 6 h for quinupristin), since successful treatment was restored by artificially prolonging the dalfopristin levels for 6 h. Thus, RP 59500 is a promising alternative to vancomycin against methicillin-resistant S. aureus infections, provided that pharmacokinetic parameters are adjusted to afford prolonged levels of both of its constituents in serum. This observation is also relevant to humans, in whom the life span of dalfopristin in serum is also shorter than that of quinupristin.