This study examined bacteriostatic and bactericidal activities of oral and parenteral antibiotics for penicillin-susceptible and intermediately and fully penicillin-resistant pneumococci. beta-Lactamase inhibitors did not affect beta-lactam results. The activities of ampicillin, amoxicillin +/- clavulanate, WY-49605, cefuroxime, cefpodoxime, cefdinir, cefixime, and cefaclor against two penicillin-susceptible, two intermediately penicillin-resistant, and two fully penicillin-resistant pneumococcal strains were tested. For all three groups, bacteriostatic values of amoxicillin and WY-49605 were lower than were those of other beta-lactams tested. Of the cephalosporins, cefdinir, cefuroxime, and cefpodoxime yielded the lowest bacteriostatic values. All beta-lactams were bactericidal (reduced original counts by > or = 3 log10 CFU/ml) at 1 dilution above bacteriostatic values, except for cefpodoxime (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above bacteriostatic values for one susceptible strain and one intermediately resistant strain), cefuroxime (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above bacteriostatic values for one intermediately resistant strain), and ampicillin (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above bacteriostatic values for one intermediately resistant strain). The activities of piperacillin, piperacillin-tazobactam, ticarcillin, ticarcillin-clavulanate, ampicillin, ampicillin-sulbactam, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, and ciprofloxacin against four penicillin-susceptible, two intermediately penicillin-resistant, and four fully penicillin-resistant pneumococcal strains were evaluated. Bacteriostatic values of piperacillin, ampicillin, and ceftriaxone for all groups were lower than were those of ticarcillin and ceftazidime. Bacteriostatic values of ciprofloxacin were unaffected by penicillin susceptibility. All beta-lactams were bactericidal at 1 dilution above the bacteriostatic value, except for piperacillin (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above the bacteriostatic value for one intermediately resistant strain), ticarcillin (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above the bacteriostatic value for one susceptible strain and one resistant strain), ampicillin (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above the bacteriostatic value for two resistant strains), ceftriaxone (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above the bacteriostatic value for one resistant strain), and ceftazidime (bactericidal at 2 dilutions above the bacteriostatic value for one susceptible strain).