Non-responders to 6-months treatment with recombinant interferon (rIFN)-alpha, 3 MU thrice weekly (primary non-responders) were treated for 6 further months with the same therapy or with a double dose of rIFN-alpha or with a different type of IFN (L-IFN). 112 primary non-responders were randomly enrolled into four groups of 28 patients each over a period of 4 years and were followed up for 6 months: group A continued the same dose of rIFN-alpha, group B was treated with the same rIFN-alpha but received a double dose (6 MU thrice weekly), group C received L-IFN, 3 MU thrice weekly, and group D stopped IFN therapy and did not receive any treatment. Patients were examined at monthly intervals and response was defined as a complete normalization of alanine amino transferase (ALT). The four groups were homogeneous as to age, sex, duration of the disease, probable source of infection, histological diagnosis. ALT and gamma glutamyl transferase (gamma GT) levels. No patient discontinued therapy for side-effects. Further treatment with rIFN-alpha 3 MU thrice weekly (group A) induced normalization of ALT levels in four patients (14%); treatment with double-dosed rIFN-alpha (group B) induced normalization of liver enzymes in six cases (21%); a different type of interferon (L-IFN) (group C) achieved normalization of serum ALT in five patients (18%). None of 28 primary non-responders who did not receive any treatment (group D) showed normalization of ALT levels. None of the patients was anti-HCV negative at the end of the study and no statistically significant difference was noted between responders and non-responders to the second course of IFN therapy as to age, sex, duration of the disease. ALT and gamma GT levels at the end of the trial. Overall at the end of the study the primary non-responders with normal levels of ALT were 15/112 (13%), with a therapeutic advantage of 7%. No statistically significant difference in the response rate was found among patients who continued IFN therapy, but prolongation of rIFN-alpha treatment at double dosage seems to be the best therapeutic regimen.