Miocamycin is an orally administered 16-membered macrolide antimicrobial drug. It has a spectrum of in vitro activity similar to that of erythromycin, inhibiting a range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms, atypical microbes and some anaerobes. Importantly, miocamycin demonstrates greater in vitro potency than erythromycin against several pathogens including Legionella pneumophila, Mycoplasma hominis, and Ureaplasma urealyticum. Equally noteworthy is its activity against erythromycin-resistant staphylococcal and streptococcal species expressing inducible-type resistance. Miocamycin possesses poor overall activity against Haemophilus influenzae and is inactive against Enterobacteriaceae. Penetration of miocamycin into body tissues and fluids is both rapid and extensive. The 3 major metabolites of miocamycin possess antimicrobial activity and may contribute to the therapeutic efficacy of the drug. Clinical data indicate that miocamycin is useful in the treatment of upper and lower respiratory tract infections in both adult and paediatric patients. Miocamycin is also effective in the treatment of urogenital tract infections caused by Chlamydia trachomatis or U. urealyticum. Several studies suggest that miocamycin is at least as effective as erythromycin in these indications; however, comparisons with newer macrolide agents have yet to be performed. In other studies, miocamycin proved to be a useful agent in the treatment of periodontal infections and as anti-infective prophylaxis in dental surgery. Miocamycin appears to have a tolerability profile qualitatively similar to that of other macrolides, with gastrointestinal and skin disorders being the most commonly reported adverse events. Current data suggest that the potential for drug interactions with miocamycin is low, with the possible exceptions of carbamazepine and cyclosporin. Thus, although further confirmation and elaboration of various aspects of its efficacy and tolerability profile is needed, at this stage miocamycin offers a useful alternative oral therapy to erythromycin for the treatment of uncomplicated community-acquired respiratory tract infections and nongonococcal urethritis.