In vivo, growth factors are currently investigated for their capacity to trigger leukemic stem cells into cycle and thus overcome kinetic drug resistance. In this study, the susceptibility of leukemic clonogenic cells to individual growth factors was related to cytosine-arabinoside (Ara-C) sensitivity. The effects of interleukin-3 (IL-3), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), and combinations of these recombinant hematopoietic factors were tested on blast cells of nine acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. Growth factor responses were assessed in semi-solid clonogenic assay and in a 10-day liquid culture followed by clonogenic assay. Heterogeneity in growth factor response was observed in both test systems, resulting in a variable pattern for individual leukemias. In the majority of cases (six of nine) the response patterns in the semi-solid and liquid cultures were divergent. To test the Ara-C sensitivity, leukemic blasts were exposed in liquid to various concentrations of Ara-C in the absence and presence of preselected growth factors. After 10 days, the number of surviving leukemic colony-forming cells (CFU-L) was assessed. Exposure to Ara-C in the presence of optimal stimulatory factor(s) resulted in a 3- to 1000-fold increase of the Ara-C toxicity in seven patients. The Ara-C concentrations resulting in 50% inhibition of clonogenicity (ID50) were 0.48-123 x 10(-8) M Ara-C in the absence of stimulatory growth factors, versus only 0.12-0.40 x 10(-8) M Ara-C in the presence of these factors. In two patients, addition of one or more factors neither increased the number of CFU-L in liquid nor enhanced the Ara-C toxicity. Even in the absence of growth factors the ID50 values in these cases were as low as 0.20 and 0.28 x 10(-8) M Ara-C and in the same range as the ID50 values observed with maximum growth factor stimulation in the other seven patients. These results indicate that Ara-C cytotoxicity can be enhanced by individually selected, clonogenic cell growth-promoting hematopoietic factors.