The DNA polymerase of human herpes viruses, including cytomegalovirus (CMV), and the reverse transcriptase of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are selectively inhibited in vitro by the pyrophosphate analogue foscarnet. Inhibition is reversible on withdrawal of foscarnet and additive or synergistic effects have been demonstrated in vitro with other antiviral drugs, including ganciclovir and zidovudine. Foscarnet appears to have negligible effects on host enzymes and cells. Complete or partial clinical resolution of ocular symptoms is obtained in more than 89% of patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and CMV retinitis during foscarnet induction therapy, but relapse occurs soon after ceasing treatment. Maintenance treatment given daily can extend the period of remission considerably. Foscarnet and ganciclovir monotherapy had similar efficacy in the treatment of CMV retinitis in patients with AIDS in several studies, and have been used concomitantly in immunocompromised patients with recalcitrant CMV infections. In 1 trial, patients receiving foscarnet survived for significantly longer than those receiving ganciclovir. Foscarnet has been used successfully in the treatment of limited numbers of immunocompromised patients with CMV-associated gastrointestinal (improvement in over 67% of patients) and other infections. Aciclovir-resistant herpes simplex infections in immunocompromised patients have also been treated successfully with foscarnet. Almost 90% of a foscarnet dose is excreted in the urine. Reversible nephrotoxicity is common during foscarnet therapy, but may be reduced by dosage adjustment and adequate hydration. Anaemia, nausea and vomiting, disturbances in electrolyte levels and genital ulceration have also been associated with administration of the drug. The different tolerability profiles of foscarnet and zidovudine facilitate the use of these agents in combination in patients with AIDS and CMV infection; whereas ganciclovir, like zidovudine, is associated with dose-limiting haematological toxicity. The apparent survival benefits seen in these patients when receiving foscarnet and zidovudine (possibly linked to synergy between zidovudine and foscarnet and/or the inherent anti-HIV activity of foscarnet), appear to offer potentially important advantages for foscarnet over ganciclovir in the treatment of selected patients with AIDS and CMV infections.