Using radiobinding, transfection and colorimetric assays, the biological significance of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and its receptor on established human tumour cell lines was investigated. The intensity of class I major histocompatibility antigen (MHC) and EGF receptor (EGFR) expression on 20 tumour cell lines was investigated and showed no direct correlation (coefficient of correlation r = 0.43 and P = 0.06). furthermore, transfection of the beta 2-microglobulin gene into a class I negative bladder tumour cell line, resulting in the re-expression of fully assembled cell surface class I antigens, did not result in alteration of EGFR expression. However, there was an inverse correlation between the intensity of EGFR expression and the stimulatory response of cells to exogenously added EGF. The per cent inhibitions of cell proliferation by EGF at 100 ng/ml for A431 (highest EGFR expressor) and Scaber (lowest EGFR expressor) were 37 and -7%, respectively. The results also showed that cell lines isolated from testis tumours positive for epithelial markers (using pan keratin antibody LP34 as an epithelial marker), expressed significantly lower EGFR levels than cell lines from bladder tumours. The expression of EGFR receptor was not modulated by interferons (IFN-alpha and -gamma and only a minor effect with IFN-beta) or active supernatant containing a mixture of cytokines. Whilst the pretreatment of tumour cells with IFNs resulted in a significant increase in the susceptibility of tumour cells to interleukin-2-activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells, EGF treatment resulted in their protection. Thus, the per cent killing at an effector:target ratio of 20:1 for untreated cells and EGF (100 ng/ml), IFN-alpha (1000 U/ml), -beta (2000 U/ml) and -gamma (100 U/ml) were 53%, 33% (P = 0.004), 64% (P = 0.004), 69% (P = 0.001) and 66% (P = 0.001), respectively. These results indicate the complex interactions between EGF and EGFR and their relevance in modifying tumour cell behaviour. The hypothesis that the resistance to cytolysis of tumour cells induced by EGF stimulation may be a factor in the accelerated tumour growth seen in patients after traumatic tissue damage is discussed.