The subepithelial immune deposits of Dorus Zadel Black (DZB) rats with mercury-induced membranous nephropathy consist of autoantibodies directed to laminin P1 and of complement. The animals develop massive proteinuria within 10-14 days which is associated with obliteration of foot processes of glomerular visceral epithelial cells (GVEC), or podocytes. Previous studies indicate that these autoantibodies are probably not the sole mediator of proteinuria and GVEC damage. In this study we investigated whether circulating or macrophage-derived cytokines can contribute to the GVEC changes as detected in vivo. In vivo at the height of the proteinuria, increased intraglomerular IFN-gamma immunoreactivity was found. In diseased rats a five-fold increase in intraglomerular macrophages was found, but we could not detect intraglomerular IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, IL-1 beta or tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) by using immunohistology. Subsequently, we exposed cultured GVEC to these cytokines to investigate their cytotoxic effects on several physiological and structural parameters. IFN-gamma and IL-4 were the only cytokines that exerted toxic effects, resulting in a rapidly decreased transepithelial resistance of confluent monolayers, which was closely associated with altered immunoreactivity of the tight junction protein ZO-1. IL-4 also affected vimentin and laminin immunoreactivity. IFN-gamma and IL-4 only interfered with monolayer integrity when added to the basolateral side of the GVEC, indicating specific (receptor-mediated) effects. Only IL-4 decreased the viability of the cells, and treated monolayers demonstrated an increased passage of the 44-kD protein horseradish peroxidase. From our experiments we concluded that IFN-gamma subtly affected monolayer integrity at the level of the tight junctions, and that IL-4 additionally induced cell death. We hypothesize that the toxic effects of the cytokines IFN-gamma and IL-4 as seen with cultured podocytes are necessary together with the autoantibodies, for the ultimate induction of proteinuria in mercury nephropathy in the DZB rat.