Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an obligate aerobe that is virtually ubiquitous in the environment. During aerobic respiration, the metabolism of dioxygen can lead to the production of reactive oxygen intermediates, one of which includes hydrogen peroxide. To counteract the potentially toxic effects of this compound, P. aeruginosa possesses two heme-containing catalases which detoxify hydrogen peroxide. In this study, we have cloned katB, encoding one catalase gene of P. aeruginosa. The gene was cloned on a 5.4-kb EcoRI fragment and is composed of 1,539 bp, encoding 513 amino acids. The amino acid sequence of the P. aeruginosa katB was approximately 65% identical to that of a catalase from a related species, Pseudomonas syringae. The katB gene was mapped to the 71- to 75-min region of the P. aeruginosa chromosome, the identical region which harbors both sodA and sodB genes encoding both manganese and iron superoxide dismutases. When cloned into a catalase-deficient mutant of Escherichia coli (UM255), the recombinant P. aeruginosa KatB was expressed (229 U/mg) and afforded this strain resistance to hydrogen peroxide nearly equivalent to that of the wild-type E. coli strain (HB101). The KatB protein was purified to homogeneity and determined to be a tetramer of approximately 228 kDa, which was in good agreement with the predicted protein size derived from the translated katB gene. Interestingly, KatB was not produced during the normal P. aeruginosa growth cycle, and catalase activity was greater in nonmucoid than in mucoid, alginate-producing organisms. When exposed to hydrogen peroxide and, to a greater extent, paraquat, total catalase activity was elevated 7- to 16-fold, respectively. In addition, an increase in KatB activity caused a marked increase in resistance to hydrogen peroxide. KatB was localized to the cytoplasm, while KatA, the "housekeeping" enzyme, was detected in both cytoplasmic and periplasmic extracts. A P. aeruginosa katB mutant demonstrated 50% greater sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide than wild-type bacteria, suggesting that KatB is essential for optimal resistance of P. aeroginosa to exogenous hydrogen peroxide.