Temperature dependence of microbicidal efficacy of formaldehyde was examined with suspension tests (pH 7.0). Test germs were Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus faecium and spores of Bacillus stearothermophilus. The methodology was nearly the same as in previous investigations (5, 7). At given exposure periods and temperatures formaldehyde concentrations necessary to produce a microbicidal effect of log (N/N0) = -4.0 (concentrations of equal efficacy) were determined. N and N0 represent the numbers of colony-forming units in suspensions with and without formaldehyde, respectively. On rectangular graphic representation with the reciprocal value of absolute temperature on the abscissa and with the logarithm of the formaldehyde concentration on the ordinate, the formaldehyde concentrations of equal efficacy fitted straight lines. Lines referring to different exposure periods nearly paralleled each other. With increasing exposure periods the steepness of the lines decreased slightly. This effect was most pronounced with Staphylococcus aureus as a test germ. The ratio of formaldehyde concentrations of equal efficacy for exposure periods of 120 minutes at 20 degrees C and 30 degrees C, respectively, was 3.1:1 with Staphylococcus aureus, and 2.8:1 with Enterococcus faecium. The corresponding ratio obtained with spores of Bacillus stearothermophilus and referring to 60 degrees C and 70 degrees C, respectively, was 3.6:1. The logarithms of these ratios decreased with temperature in the same measure as the pertinent absolute temperatures increased. On the basis of the previously presented three-dimensional model of the relations between concentration, period of action and efficacy of microbicidal agents, it could be shown that deviations of the results from a linear and parallel course reflect an inconstant concentration exponent. When low formaldehyde concentration, long exposure period and "high" temperature coincide, the efficacy of formaldehyde is lower than calculated for a linear and parallel course of the relation.