During the past few years, cyto- and immunocytochemical techniques have been developed and widely used for locating and identifying various molecules in plant cell compartments. The last decade has witnessed tremendous improvements in molecular cytology, thus allowing an accurate in situ detection of various components thought to play important biological functions in the plant metabolism. The use of immunocytochemistry to investigate resistance mechanisms of plants upon pathogen attack has provided key information on the defense strategy that plants elaborate during a host-pathogen interaction. Of the various proteins induced in response to infection, chitinases and beta-1,3-glucanases have been the focus of particular attention due to their believed antimicrobial activity through the hydrolysis of the main fungal wall components, chitin and beta-1,3-glucans. Attention has also been paid to beta-fructosidase, the enzyme that hydrolyzes sucrose into glucose and fructoside. The marked accumulation of this enzyme upon pathogen infection has led to the consideration that infection may greatly influence the metabolic activity of colonized tissues by creating alterations of source-sink relationships. Another facet of the plant's defense strategy that has been the focus of considerable interest is related to the accumulation of structural compounds, such as hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins and callose, to reinforce the wall architecture, thus decreasing vulnerability to microbial enzymes. A number of alternatives designed to improve plant protection towards pathogen invasion have been suggested. Among these, the production of transgenic plants expressing constitutively a foreign resistance gene and the pretreatment of plants with elicitors of defense reactions have been the subject of intensive studies at the molecular, biochemical, and cytological levels. Results of such studies clearly demonstrate the important contribution that cyto- and immunocytochemical approaches can make to our knowledge of how plants defend themselves and how plant disease resistance can be directly enhanced. These approaches will undoubtedly be active areas for future research in the development of biological control alternatives in which the mode of action of the product used is of key importance.