According for their topographic and isolated locations (no built-up area or trees down-wind) 13 fattening pig pens with an average stocking rate of 737 (360-2500) have been investigated for burden by immission of animals and the environment outside the stables up to a distance of 100m downwind of the source. These studies have been carried out between June 1988 and April 1989 in monthly intervals. The investigated parameters have been: dust of particle size < 5 microns, stable specific bacteria, ammonia and symptoms of animals respiratory diseases. In the stalls could be shown an significant seasonal influence on bacteria, lung passing dust content and ammonia concentration with a maximum during December/January (1.1 x 10(6) CFU/m3; 0.26 mg/m3; 27 ppm) and minimum during June/July (5.7 x 10(5) CFU/m3; 0.075 mg/m3; 11 ppm). In the environment outside the pigsties a significant seasonal influence could be found only for the stable specific bacteria up to the distance of 100m of the source of emission, showing a maximum during fall and winter (1.7 x 10(3) CFU/m3) and minimal concentration during spring and summer (9.3 x 10(2) CFU/m3). Due to emission of spent air a high significant reduction of the stable specific bacteria and lung passing dust concentration could be established outside the stables within a distance of 10 m. The content of stable specific bacteria come to 0.2% (1941 CFU/m3) compared with the amount measured at the air outlet of the spent air shaft. At this distance the lung passing dust concentration has been reduced to 11% (0.016 mg/m3) of the concentration at the emission source. In comparison to the examined "neutral air" upwind, the content of lung passing dust downwind has not been heightened significantly at any measuring point or time of the year, whereas the content of stable specific bacteria downwind was significantly higher up to a distance of 50 m (p < or = 0.01). The stable specific bacteria that were isolated from the air outside the pigsties, mostly gram positive cocci, had in part a strong resistance against Erythromycin, Penicillin, Tetracyclin and Ampicillin. The fact that in all investigated farms irritations or diseases of the animals respiratory tract in different degrees of intensity could be determined shows the urgency to minimize the burden by optimizing the hygienic situation inside the stalls. This means especially the colder period of the year, because a high frequency of transgression of the ammonia threshold value according to German regulations for pig housing could be found in this time.