Residue 104 is frequently mutated from a glutamic acid to a lysine in the extended-spectrum TEM beta-lactamases responsible for the resistance to third-generation cephalosporins in clinical Gram negative strains. Among class A beta-lactamases, it is the most variable residue within a highly conserved loop which delineates one side of the active site of the enzymes. To investigate the role of this residue in the extended-spectrum phenotype, it has been replaced by serine, threonine, lysine, arginine, tyrosine and proline. All these substitutions yield active enzymes, with no drastic changes in kinetic properties compared with the wild-type enzyme, except with cefaclor, but an overall improved affinity for second- and third-generation cephalosporins. Only mutant E104K exhibits a significant ability to hydrolyse cefotaxime. Molecular modelling shows that the substitutions have generally no impact on the conformation of the 101-111 loop as the side chains of residues at position 104 are all turned towards the solvent. Unexpectedly, the E104P mutant turns out to be the most efficient enzyme. All our results argue in favour of an indirect role for this residue 104 in the substrate specificity of the class A beta-lactamases. This residue contributes to the precise positioning of residues 130-132 which are involved in substrate binding and catalysis. Changing residue 104 could also modify slightly the local electrostatic potential in this part of the active site. The limited kinetic impact of the mutations at this position have to be analysed in the context of the microbiological problem of resistance to third-generation cephalosporins. Although mutation E104K improves the ability of the enzyme to hydrolyse these compounds, it is not sufficient to confer true resistance, and is always found in clinical isolates associated with at least one mutation at another part of the active site. It is the combined effect of the two mutations that synergistically enhances the hydrolytic capability of the enzyme towards third-generation cephalosporins.