The in vitro activity of nine fluoroquinolones, enoxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, lomefloxacin, tosufloxacin, sparfloxacin, fleroxacin and levofloxacin, and two earlier quinolones, nalidixic acid and pipemidic acid, against 1,346 bacterial strains isolated clinically between 1989 and 1990, was evaluated by agar dilution method. The bacteria studied were Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-susceptible and -resistant strains), Staphylococcus epidermidis, Enterococcus species (including high-level gentamicin-resistant strains), Escherichia coli, Salmonella species, Proteus mirabilis, Proteus vulgaris, Morganella morganii, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae, Serratia marcescens, Citrobacter spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas cepacia, Acinetobacter baumannii, and Bacteroides fragilis. In contrast to the moderate to poor activity of two earlier quinolones, the fluoroquinolones acted well against most Enterobacteriaceae and A. baumannii. The minimum inhibitory concentrations for 90% of the drug strains (MIC90s) were < 1 microgram/mL against most tested species. Ciprofloxacin, tosufloxacin, sparfloxacin, and levofloxacin were more effective against multi-drug-resistant nosocomial pathogens. All fluoroquinolones assayed were very active against methicillin-susceptible S. aureus, with MIC90s < or = 1 microgram/mL. For methicillin-resistant strains, on the other hand, the MIC90s were > or = 4 micrograms/mL. There was no significant difference in fluoroquinolone susceptibility between methicillin-susceptible and -resistant S. epidermidis. Sparfloxacin, tosufloxacin, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin were more active against enterococci. Most fluoroquinolones were relatively inactive against B. fragilis, with the exception of tosufloxacin, sparfloxacin and levofloxacin. The MIC90s of most quinolones assayed against K. pneumoniae, Citrobacter spp., E. cloacae, S. aureus and S. epidermidis were at least four-fold higher in our study. Therefore, it is important for physicians to use fluoroquinolones carefully so as to prevent or delay the emergence of resistant strains.