Levels of DNA relatedness were determined by performing DNA-DNA hybridization experiments (S1 nuclease procedure) with 13 human isolates exhibiting various antimicrobial susceptibility patterns which had been identified as Corynebacterium jeikeium by classical tests and the API Coryne system and with reference strains of C. jeikeium and related taxa. Twelve of 13 isolates which formed three genomic groups showed between 22 and 75% relatedness with the type strain of C. jeikeium. One of these genomic groups included all the strains resistant to penicillin and gentamicin and is genomically related to the C. jeikeium type strain at the species level. In addition, the reference strain of "Corynebacterium genitalium" biotype II was found to belong to this genospecies and therefore can be considered as a synonym of C. jeikeium. In contrast, one isolate and the reference strains of "Corynebacterium pseudogenitalium" biotypes C-3 and C-4 which were assigned to C. jeikeium by the API Coryne system were less than 10% related to the C. jeikeium type strain. These nongenomically related strains can be differentiated from the jeikeium-related strains on the basis of positive acidification from fructose and growth under anaerobic conditions. Furthermore, these strains exhibited full susceptibility to penicillin whereas the strains related to the C. jeikeium type strain are resistant to or only moderately susceptible to penicillin. No genomic relationship was found between C. jeikeium-related strains and other lipophilic coryneforms, identified as Corynebacterium accolens or Corynebacterium group G or F. Our study demonstrates the necessity to perform the fructose fermentation test or respiratory-type test for the correct identification of lipophilic coryneforms as C. jeikeium. Although these strains show genomic diversity at the species level, in a practical aspect, biochemical properties as well as antimicrobial susceptibility may allow the classification of such isolates in this single taxon.