The frequency of infection by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is high in Japan and control of such strains is urgently needed. Arbekacin (ABK), a semisynthetic aminoglycoside, has potent activity against S. aureus, including resistant strains, and against Gram-negative bacteria as well. For this reason, in surgical infections (which are often caused by more than one bacterium), this drug might be particularly effective. We calculated the MIC and the decrease in the MIC when cultures of 59 resistant strains of S. aureus isolated in our wards at Osaka City University Hospital, contained arbekacin in the medium. We also used the drug to treat 12 infections caused by resistant strains of S. aureus. The MICs of vancomycin had a single peak at 0.5 microgram/ml, and those for ABK had double peaks at 0.5 and 4.0 micrograms/ml. The effect of arbekacin in lowering the MIC of minocycline (MINO) was slight because of the low MIC of MINO. Effects on fosfomycin (FOM), ampicillin, clavulanic acid/ticarcillin, cefotiam, cefuzonam, flomoxef, and imipenem/cilastatin were strong; the peaks were lowered by 1/2(7)-1/2(11). When 1.0 micrograms/ml ABK was present in the medium, the efficacy of FOM was increased enough that, by prediction from the pharmacokinetics of FOM (blood level when given at the usual dose), all but one (2%) of the 47 resistant strains would be eradicated clinically. If 2.0 micrograms/ml ABK were in the medium, all strain would be eradicated, by our calculations. We treated 11 infections and one colonization by resistant strains of S. aureus with ABK and evaluated the response in these cases of infection. Four infections were treated with FOM as well. The clinical efficacy was good in four infections (three patients), fair in four, and poor in three, for an efficacy rate of 36%. All presumed causative bacteria were eradicated in two (18%) of the 11 infections and S. aureus strains were eradicated in three (27%) of the 11 infections. No symptoms of side effects were reported, but blood urea nitrogen and creatinine rose in a 72-year-old woman with duodenal perforation and peritonitis. The MIC levels of ABK were satisfactory, but clinical efficacy for staphylococcal infections caused by resistant strains was unsatisfactory.