Despite the introduction of newer antibiotics, vaccinations, and better supportive care, CAP remains a common, frequently fatal disease. Age and coexisting illness influence which infectious agents are most likely to cause infection. Severity of illness and clinical features are influenced by various host factors and by the virulence of the infectious agent. Mortality and morbidity are reduced by the rapid institution of appropriate antimicrobial therapy. Because of the limitations of presently available diagnostic tests, many patients are begun on empiric regimens, and in up to half of these individuals, a cause is not identified. Although there are a number of potential pathogens, it is possible to identify likely pathogens based on easily identifiable clinical factors (age, presence of coexisting disease, severity of illness at presentation, and the need for hospitalization). Using this approach, CAP in immunocompetent adults may be divided into four categories. Once empiric therapy has been initiated, therapy should be continued for at least 72 hours unless clinical deterioration is noted. Within 4 days, fever and leukocytosis should return to baseline, but abnormal physical findings (i.e., crackles) require longer to resolve, especially with coexisting illness, and chest radiographic findings are the last to return to baseline and are especially delayed if the patient is bacteremic or has structural lung disease. Not all patients respond to initial empiric therapy. Reasons for this include antimicrobial resistance, the presence of nonbacterial pathogens (respiratory viruses), unusual bacterial pathogens, noninfectious causes that may mimic CAP, infectious complications (i.e., empyema), and pneumonia occurring in patients with unrecognized severe immunosuppression. Failure to improve after 72 hours and development of deterioration are indications for repeat diagnostic workup and consideration of alternative diagnoses. More invasive diagnostic tests are appropriate in severely ill patients and in those whose condition is deteriorating rapidly.