Thyroid hormone receptor (T3R)-accessory protein heterodimers preferentially bind to thyroid hormone response elements (TREs), which contain hexamer domains arranged as a direct repeat separated by a 4-basepair gap (DR + 4). T3R homodimers, however, preferentially bind to elements that consist of an inverted palindrome. We now report on unique T3R binding patterns and functional characteristics of two such elements that mediate T3 regulation. We performed mutational analysis of the chicken lysozyme silencer F2 (LysF2) TRE and demonstrated that the two functional binding domains are arranged as an inverted palindrome separated by 6 basepairs. Both the LysF2 TRE and the similarly arranged myelin basic protein TRE bind T3R dimers at very low T3R concentrations. Despite the high relative affinity for T3R dimer binding, the T3 induction conferred by these elements is low compared to that of previously characterized TREs with a DR + 4 arrangement. The laminin-B1 gene element, previously shown to bind retinoic acid receptor, contains at least four hexameric binding domains. All of the domains can bind T3R simultaneously and are involved in conferring T3 induction, but bind with a different pattern than that reported for retinoic acid receptor. T3R homodimer binding to a series of mutant laminin-B1 elements and T3 induction were significantly correlated (r = 0.82; P < 0.05). T3R homodimer binding to LysF2 element mutants was not correlated with T3 induction (r = 0.32; P > 0.05); however, T3R-nuclear protein heterodimer binding was significantly correlated (r = 0.67; P < 0.05). T3R-nuclear protein heterodimers, but not homodimers, bound consistently to mutations of the LysF2 element that altered the gap between hexamers. The overall discordance between strong T3R binding to these elements and weak T3 induction indicates that the unusual hexamer arrangement places the T3R complex in an unfavorable configuration for maximal T3-dependent transactivation. The differential T3 sensitivity of generalized resistance to thyroid hormone-associated T3R mutants to the LysF2 element compared with the DR + 4 arrangement suggests that these unique features may have physiological significance.