OBJECTIVE: To improve efficacy of and compliance with therapy for tuberculosis in children. OPTIONS: Short-course (6-month) multi-drug therapy, either non-supervised or directly supervised, versus long-course (more than 6-month) multi-drug therapy. OUTCOMES: Success (more than 90% of cases cured without relapse or serious side effects), development of drug resistance and compliance with treatment. EVIDENCE: Review of published reports of efficacy trials of tuberculosis therapy in children, side effects and compliance studies; consensus of expert opinion. VALUES: Values were assigned to the evidence by the Infectious Disease and Immunization Committee of the Canadian Paediatric Society through review of the data and consensus. BENEFITS, HARMS AND COSTS: Improved efficacy and compliance with short-course protocols should lower the rate of treatment failure among children in Canada and the cost of tuberculosis care. RECOMMENDATIONS: A short-course (6-month) protocol of four drugs for the first 2 months and two drugs for the subsequent 4 months is recommended to treat pulmonary tuberculosis or extrapulmonary disease causing lymphadenopathy. Tuberculous meningitis, disease involving bones and joints and tuberculosis with HIV infection require longer courses of treatment. Asymptomatic tuberculosis should be treated with daily doses of isoniazid for 9 months. Intermittent directly observed therapy is recommended if compliance cannot be ensured. Routine liver function testing is not recommended for prepubescent children taking isoniazid, but monthly assessment for clinical symptoms and periodic liver function evaluation is advised in adolescent women, especially post partum. VALIDATION: This report was reviewed by the directors of the Canadian Paediatric Society, the Hepatitis and Special Pathogens Division of the Laboratory Centre for Disease Control and the Canadian Thoracic Society. The recommendations are similar to those of the American Academy of Pediatrics. SPONSOR: The recommendations were developed and endorsed by the Infectious Disease and Immunization Committee of the Canadian Paediatric Society.