The development of antibacterial agents has provided a means of treating bacterial diseases which were, previously, often fatal in both man and animal and thus represents one of the major advances of the 20th century. However, the efficacy of these agents is increasingly being compromised by the development of bacterial resistance to the drugs currently available for therapeutic use. Bacterial resistance can be combated in two ways. New drugs to which bacteria are susceptible can be developed and policies to contain the development and spread of resistance can be implemented. Both strategies require an understanding of the mechanisms of drug resistance, its epidemiology and the role of environmental factors in promoting resistance. Over the past thirty years our knowledge of bacterial resistance has increased dramatically mainly due to new technology that has become available. Bacteria are able to resist antibacterials by a variety of mechanisms: for example, altering the target to decrease susceptibility to the antibacterial, inactivating or destroying the drug, reducing drug transport into the cell or metabolic bypass. These drug resistance determinants are mediated via one of two distinct genetic mechanisms, a mutation in the bacterial chromosome or by a transmissible element; either a plasmid or a transposon. Significant differences exist between these two types of drug resistance as transmissible resistance, which is mainly plasmid-mediated, permits intraspecies and even interspecies transfer to occur. In contrast, chromosomal resistance can only be passed on to progeny. Transmissible antibacterial resistance is the major cause of concern as it can lead to the rapid spread of antibacterial resistance and has proven difficult, if not impossible, to eradicate. Furthermore, plasmids and transposons can code for multiple antibiotic resistance as well as virulence genes. Antibacterials for which transferable resistance has been identified include most commonly used antibacterials such as beta-lactams, aminoglycosides, macrolides, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol and trimethoprim. One notable exception is the 4-quinolones for which plasmid-mediated resistance has yet to be identified.