Previous studies have demonstrated the development of an age-dependent resistance to reinfection after chemotherapeutic cure of the helminthic parasite Schistosoma mansoni. Here we report on a longitudinal investigation of cell-mediated responses in infected individuals before and after treatment which was designed to outline those parameters important in mediating a protective response. A well-defined study group of 89 individuals with an age range of 9 to 35 years was selected from an area of high S. mansoni transmission in the Machakos district of Kenya. Peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferation and cytokine production (interleukin-2 [IL-2], gamma interferon IL-5, IL-4, and tumor necrosis factor) in response to different crude life cycle-stage antigens of S. mansoni were assessed longitudinally in vitro before, 3 months after, and 1 year after treatment. Detailed statistical analyses of the results from this study have indicated a clear negative association between the proliferative responses to adult- and schistosomulum-stage antigens and subsequent reinfection intensity in older individuals (14 to 35 years) which was not present in the younger individuals (9 to 13 years). This association was significant even after the effects of age, sex, and exposure had been accounted for in multiple regression analyses. Cytokines were detected predominantly in response to adult worm and egg antigen extracts. An inverse association between the two cytokines gamma interferon and IL-5 was detected in response to all antigens at the three time points investigated, indicating cross-regulation in the production of these two mediators. Differences in antigen-specific cytokine levels between the two age groups were detected, with significantly higher IL-5 levels detected in the older (more resistant) age group. An inverse correlation between this cytokine and reinfection was detected but could not be dissociated from the effects of age and exposure in multiple regression analysis.