N,N-Dimethylglycylamido (DMG) derivatives of minocycline and 6-demethyl-6-deoxytetracycline are new semisynthetic tetracyclines referred to as the glycylcyclines. The in vitro activities of the glycylcyclines were evaluated in comparison with those of minocycline and tetracycline against strains carrying characterized tetracycline resistance determinants and against 995 recent clinical isolates obtained from geographically distinct medical centers in North America. The glycylcyclines were active against tetracycline-resistant strains carrying efflux [tet(A), tet(B), tet(C), and tet(D) in Escherichia coli and tet(K) in Staphylococcus aureus] and ribosomal protection [tet(M) in S. aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, and E. coli)] resistance determinants. Potent activity (MIC for 90% of strains, < or = 0.5 microgram/ml) was obtained with the glycylcyclines against methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant S. aureus, E. faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, and various streptococcal species. The glycylcyclines exhibited good activity against a wide diversity of gram-negative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, most of which were less susceptible to minocycline and tetracycline. The activities of the glycylcyclines against most organisms tested were comparable to each other. The in vivo efficacies of the glycylcyclines against acute lethal infections in mice when dosed intravenously were reflective of their in vitro activities. The glycylcyclines had efficacies comparable to that of minocycline against infections with methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant S. aureus strains, a strain carrying tet(K), and a tetracycline-susceptible E. coli strain but exceeded the effectiveness of minocycline against infections with resistant isolates, including strains harboring tet(M) or tet(B). Levels of DMG-6-deoxytetracycline in serum were higher and more sustained than those of DMG-minocycline or minocycline. Our results show that the glycylcyclines have potent in vitro activities against a wide spectrum of gram-positive and gram-negative, aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, including many resistant strains. On the basis of their in vitro and in vivo activities, the glycylcyclines represent a significant advance to the tetracycline class of antibiotics and have good potential value for clinical efficacy.