Brefeldin A (BFA), an isoprenoid fungal metabolite, dramatically disrupts intracellular protein transport and protein secretion. BFA protects cells from the cytotoxicity of a plant toxin, ricin or pseudomonas toxin, but not that of diphtheria toxin (Yoshida et al., 1991. Expt. Cell Res., 192: 389-395.). In this study, we examined whether BFA could differentially change the cytotoxicity of ricin between BFA-sensitive cells and BFA-resistant cells. As a BFA-resistant cell line, we used a resistant cell line, KB/BF2-2, derived from BFA-sensitive human cancer KB cells. BFA treatment caused the disappearance of typical Golgi cisternae and the concomitant appearance of dilated vesicles in the cytoplasm in KB cells. By contrast, KB/BF2-2 cells had already altered Golgi structures with poor development of cisternae and also many vesicles in the absence of BFA, and BFA treatment did not further induce the morphological changes. Although a plasma membrane-specific marker protein, alpha-adaptin, was localized similarly in KB/BF2-2 as KB, Golgi specific markers such as beta-cop and gamma-adaptin were distributed in the cytoplasmic small vesicles as well as Golgi compartments in KB/BF2-2 cells in the absence of BFA, and the mutant cells showed no apparent changes in the distribution even when exposed to BFA. Ricin inhibited protein synthesis in KB and KB/BF2-2 to similar levels while pretreatment of KB cells with BFA at 0.1 microgram/ml almost completely reversed the inhibitory effect of ricin. By contrast, the pre-exposure of KB/BF2-2 cells to 1.0 microgram/ml BFA only partially rescued the ricin-induced inhibition of protein synthesis. Exposure to BFA at 30 min before ricin addition or at 0 min with ricin rescued the protein synthesis inhibition, but no rescue occurred when BFA was added 30 min after ricin addition. BFA could not rescue the protein synthesis inhibition by another toxin, diphtheria toxin. Our results suggest that BFA-resistant mutation causes a specific change in the endocytic membrane traffic of ricin in human cells, and also that cytotoxicity of diphtheria toxin does not share a common pathway of the intracellular transport with that of ricin.