Increasing antibiotic resistance in the enterococci, including the capacity for beta-lactamase production and the development of high-level aminoglycoside resistance, has complicated the treatment of serious enterococcal infections, which often require synergistic antibiotic combinations for cure. We utilized the rabbit model of aortic valve endocarditis to investigate the effects of various antibiotics, alone and in combination, against a multiply antibiotic-resistant isolate of Enterococcus faecalis. Female New Zealand White rabbits were infected with either a beta-lactamase-producing, gentamicin-resistant isolate of E. faecalis or a non-beta-lactamase-producing, aminoglycoside-susceptible isolate, and the mean log10 CFU per gram of vegetation were determined. The most active agents were low-dose ampicillin-sulbactam (200 mg/kg of body weight per day), high-dose ampicillin-sulbactam (400 mg/kg of body weight per day), and vancomycin (150 mg/kg of body weight per day), which reduced the titers of bacteria by 2.27, 2.76, and 2.85 log10 (CFU/g, respectively, compared with controls. While ampicillin-sulbactam and vancomycin were equally efficacious in reducing titers of bacteria in vegetations, no animals were cured (defined as < 2 log10 CFU/g of vegetation) by either agent, whether treatment was continued for 3 or 7 days. The addition of gentamicin was not associated with increased killing in rabbits infected with the aminoglycoside-resistant isolate. Both high-dose ampicillin-sulbactam and vancomycin regimens demonstrated significant, continued reduction in bacterial titers with the longer periods of treatment (P < or = 0.05); 7-day treatment with high-dose ampicillin-sulbactam produced a greater reduction in bacterial titers in vegetation than 7-day treatment with vancomycin (P < or = 0.05). We conclude that ampicillin-sulbactam and vancomycin are equally effective in the treatment of experimental endocarditis due to beta-lactamase-producing, highly gentamicin-resistant E. faecalis. The optimum therapy for such infections in humans is not known.