A total of 50 oxacillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (ORSA) strains that were clumping factor negative (CFN) and protein A negative by latex agglutination were collected from patients in six different hospitals at different locations in Germany during 1991 and 1992. Antibiograms, bacteriophage typing, and plasmid analysis were performed. The antibiograms showed that, besides oxacillin, all CFN ORSA strains were resistant to gentamicin, clindamycin, erythromycin, ciprofloxacin, and fosfomycin. All these isolates were nontypeable with an international set of phages, and an additional experimental phage set indicated that the strains were phage type 16, 192. Moreover, all isolates possessed a single plasmid of 30 kb, and restriction analysis of those plasmids revealed identical patterns. For genotyping, these 50 isolates were also analyzed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of the coagulase and protein A genes and then by restriction enzyme digestion and analysis of restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs). With 49 strains, electrophoresis of SmaI-digested chromosomal DNA revealed identical PFGE patterns regarding the number and size of the DNA fragments, which could be differentiated from those of clumping factor-positive ORSA strains. Typing for the coagulase gene by PCR revealed PCR products of identical sizes. The AluI restriction digestion patterns of the PCR products were identical. PCR with primers derived from the region of that part of the protein A gene that encodes the immunoglobulin G-binding domains showed a PCR product that was about 170 bp smaller than that of the protein A gene from strains that were positive in the protein A latex agglutination test. Since it is precisely this size that is required in order to encode one immunoglobulin G-binding region, we assume that this is not present in the CFN ORSA strains. The phenotypical and genotypical features identify these very unusual CFN ORSA stains as being of clonal origin.