BACKGROUND: Suramin is an anthelmintic drug that recently has been shown to have clinical efficacy in the treatment of patients with some advanced malignancies, including prostate carcinoma. The current study was done to assess the effect of suramin at clinically relevant doses on the growth in culture of a human prostatic carcinoma cell line, PC-3. METHODS: The antiproliferative effect of varying doses of suramin on PC-3 was assessed. Northern blot analysis was done to assess the potential changes in genetic expression at different times after the initiation of treatment. RESULTS: Suramin inhibited the proliferation of PC-3 in a dose-related manner (concentration range, 30-300 microM). Compared with fetal calf serum 2%, when the cells were grown in fetal calf serum 10%, higher concentrations of suramin were required to inhibit tritiated thymidine incorporation. When grown in RPMI without supplement, the PC-3 cell number remained the same. When 100 microM suramin was included, the cell number decreased. By contrast, when RPMI was supplemented with insulin, transferrin, and selenium (ITS), PC-3 grew well. The inhibition of the proliferation of PC-3 cells by suramin was decreased when ITS were added to the cells grown under serum-free conditions. CONCLUSIONS: These results were consistent with the hypothesis that in vitro inhibition of the growth of PC-3 cells by suramin may be caused, at least in part, by the growth factor antagonism of the drug. In fetal calf serum 2%, the suramin inhibition was reversible after 3 days. If the treatment was extended to 6 days, however, the PC-3 cells were unable to recover. Cell-cycle analysis revealed that, after 6 days of treatment, there was a decrease in the number of cells in G1 that corresponded with an increased number of cells in G2/M. This suggested that critical antineoplastic events were occurring during this time. Molecular analysis did not detect any altered expression of actin, transforming growth factors alpha or beta, or histone compared with untreated control samples.