Highly metastatic alpha/beta-interferon (IFN-alpha/beta)-resistant Friend leukemia cells (FLC) were transfected with a retroviral vector (pLTneoL-5) containing the mouse IFN-alpha 1 gene. Transfected clones were isolated and tested for their capacity to secrete IFN-alpha 1 and their tumorigenicity when injected s.c. into immunocompetent syngeneic DBA/2 mice. Almost all FLC clones producing IFN in the range of 16-512 units/ml failed to grow when injected s.c. or i.p. into normal mice, whereas control FLC (transfected with a vector without the IFN gene) exhibited the highly malignant phenotype of the original FLC. High levels of IFN were detected in peritoneal fluid, tumor extracts, and sera of mice given injections of IFN-producing cells. Injection of mice with antibodies to IFN-alpha/beta resulted in the development of tumor ascites in mice transplanted i.p. with IFN-producing FLC. In contrast to the tumor rejection observed in immunocompetent mice, IFN-producing FLC were highly tumorigenic when transplanted into immunosuppressed nude mice. Mice given injections of IFN-producing FLC developed a long-lasting tumor-specific immune resistance to subsequent injection with highly metastatic FLC. Simultaneous s.c. injection of both metastatic FLC (approximately 10(3) 50% lethal doses) and IFN-producing cells resulted in potent inhibition of the tumor growth, with a survival rate of approximately 50% for injected mice. Contralateral injection (s.c.) of IFN-producing FLC into mice with established metastatic tumors produced a marked inhibition of tumor growth, with a survival rate of 10% for injected mice. These results indicate that: (a) the genetic modification of highly metastatic FLC by means of transfer of the IFN-alpha 1 gene results in potent tumor cell rejection, which is mediated by an IFN-induced host immune response; (b) injections of IFN-producing tumor cells are effective in inhibiting tumor growth in mice with established metastatic tumors. These data suggest that tumor cells transfected with the IFN-alpha gene might be used as an effective therapy for the treatment of certain human metastatic tumors, provided that suitable strategies are defined to prevent growth of the cytokine-producing cells.