Recent studies have demonstrated that interaction between various agrochemicals and soil microorganisms may either slow down or enhance processes of degradation. Soil disinfestation is employed for the control of soil-borne pathogens and weeds. Soil application of such broad-spectrum biocides, as well as some more selective chemicals, has a strong effect on microbial activity, which may result in drastic reduction in the rate of degradation of pesticides applied to such treated soils. Application of pesticides to previously disinfested soils may extend their biological activity, which in the case of herbicides could cause phytotoxic damage to the next crop. In contrast, repeated application of the same or structurally related pesticides may result in a selective buildup of microbial populations capable of degrading the pesticide at much faster rates. Cases of accelerated degradation were reported for pesticides belonging to various chemical groups. Studies were conducted to evaluate the mechanisms of accelerated degradation. For several pesticides it has been shown that soil fungi are involved in their normal degradation, but not in their accelerated degradation. The shift in the rate of degradation of pesticides such as diphenamid, benomyl, and S-ethyl dipropylthiocarbamate, in soils that have acquired accelerated degradation, seems to be associated with the buildup of populations of bacterial degraders. Moreover, it has been shown that for the herbicide diphenamide, accelerated degradation is apparently linked to the induction of an oxidative demethylation process in soil bacteria, which might be analogous to the development of resistance in pests. Contrary to studies demonstrating accelerated degradation of the systemic insecticide aldicarb and accumulation of aldicarb sulfoxide in non-history soils, our work has shown that repeated application of this carbamate at several locations in Israel over a 10-year period did not induce accelerated degradation. It should be pointed out that in the Israeli soils there was only minimal formation of aldicarb sulfoxide. These studies were performed in soils with a pH ranging from 7.8 to 8.3, which is higher than the pH reported for soils where accelerated degradation was detected.