Recently, a new stabilized stannous fluoride (SnF2) dentifrice (SSF) has been developed. The aim of the present work was to examine the antimicrobial activity of SnF2, and to assess the long-term microbial safety of this dentifrice in a series of in vitro and clinical evaluations. Results of in vitro time-kill experiments with representative oral bacteria demonstrated that SnF2 exerts broad antimicrobial activity against both Gram-positives and Gram-negatives and, in particular, has potent activity against Streptococcus mutans. Sixty-eight subjects participated in a nine-day plaque regrowth clinical study to assess the short-term antiplaque effect of SSF. The results revealed no significant differences from the negative control, suggesting that SnF2 does not detectably or directly alter plaque microbial viability or composition. Separately, evaluation of microbial safety in a subgroup of 120 subjects participating in a six-month clinical efficacy and safety trial found no significant ecological shifts between SSF and the negative (NaF dentifrice) control among 11 supragingival microbial populations examined. The potential for development of bacterial resistance to SnF2 was assessed under both in vitro and clinical conditions. In a rigorous assessment of the ability of bacterial populations to develop either phenotypic or genotypic resistance to SnF2, representative bacteria were exposed to continuous sub-lethal concentrations of SnF2 in a laboratory chemostat for at least 9 days. Results of time-kill experiments on exposed populations revealed no significant changes in susceptibility despite exposure of over 10(12) bacteria. Based on typical spontaneous mutation rates of 10(-6) to 10(-8), these results suggested that the potential for bacteria to develop resistance to SnF2 is low. Evaluation of susceptibility to SnF2 to over 800 bacterial isolates obtained over the course of the six-month clinical trial corroborate the in vitro findings, revealing no changes in susceptibility suggestive of development of resistance to SnF2 is a microbiologically safe agent for oral use and support separate clinical observations demonstrating the safety and efficacy of this stabilized SnF2 dentifrice.