Despite the use of penicillin for more than 40 years in treating GABHS infections, there has been no significant change in the in vitro susceptibility of GABHS to penicillin. Reported failures to eradicate GABHS from the upper respiratory tracts of patients with pharyngitis and the apparent resurgence of serious Group A streptococcal infections and their sequelae probably are not related to the emergence of penicillin resistance. Although erythromycin resistance in GABHS had been a major problem in Japan and continues to be a major problem in Finland, it has not been a problem in this country. The susceptibility of GABHS to the newer macrolide antibiotics appears to be similar to that of erythromycin. Comprehensive, community-wide programs to continuously monitor for erythromycin resistance in GABHS would be difficult to justify. However, because little is known about how erythromycin resistance in GABHS is acquired or spread, it would be reasonable to periodically monitor isolates of GABHS for erythromycin resistance. A substantial proportion of GABHS are currently resistant to tetracyclines and these agents are inappropriate for treating GABHS infections. Although little recent information is available about the susceptibility of GABHS to sulfonamides, these agents have been shown to be ineffective in eradicating GABHS from the upper respiratory tract regardless of the in vitro sensitivities. GABHS have not been shown to be resistant to any of the commonly used oral cephalosporins; however, there is a great deal of variability among these agents in their activity against GABHS. Clindamycin resistance in GABHS has remained unusual. This agent is an alternative for treating GABHS infections due to macrolide-resistant strains in patients who cannot be treated with beta-lactam antibiotics. There is no reason, based on the in vitro susceptibilities of GABHS, to change the current recommendations for treating GABHS infections with penicillin and for using erythromycin for patients who are allergic to penicillin.