Patients with bacterial pneumonia often are treated empirically with parenteral broad-spectrum antimicrobials intended to cover potential gram-negative and gram-positive pathogens. However, beta-lactamase-mediated resistance has developed to many of these antimicrobials, particularly third-generation cephalosporins, and has led to the development of fourth-generation agents that are relatively beta-lactamase stable. The purpose of these studies was to compare the efficacy and safety of the fourth-generation agent, cefepime, with that of the third-generation agent, ceftazidime, in the treatment of hospitalized patients with moderate-to-severe bacterial pneumonia. A total of 336 (97 evaluable) patients were enrolled in an open-label study, and 99 (23 evaluable) patients were enrolled in a blinded study of patients with lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) including pneumonia. Patients were randomized to receive either cefepime 1 g every 12 hours or ceftazidime 1 g every 8 hours given as an intravenous infusion over 30 minutes. Efficacy analysis included the evaluable patients while the safety analysis included all patients. The results in the open-label study were as follows: In patients with pneumonia, clinical response was satisfactory in 58 (85%) of 68 patients in the cefepime group and 21 (72%) of 29 patients in the ceftazidime group. Bacteriologic eradication occurred for 75 (93%) of 81 pathogens and 30 (94%) of 32 pathogens isolated from the 68 cefepime-treated patients and 29 ceftazidime-treated patients, respectively. The results in the blinded study were as follows: In patients with pneumonia, clinical response was satisfactory in 12 (80%) of 15 cefepime patients and in 7 (88%) of 8 ceftazidime patients, and the bacteriologic eradication rates were 85% (17/20 pathogens) and 73% (8/11 pathogens) isolated from the 15 cefepime-treated patients and the eight ceftazidime-treated patients, respectively. Among the most frequent adverse events in both groups were nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Similar adverse events were noted in the 99 patients in the blinded study. These studies indicate that the efficacy and safety of cefepime administered at 1 g twice daily is comparable to that of ceftazidime administered at 1 g three times daily for treatment of hospitalized patients with pneumonia caused by susceptible pathogens.