Cephalosporins are one of the mainstays of antibiotic therapy, and third-generation cephalosporins are first-line agents for the treatment of many types of serious infections, including those of nosocomial origin. Gaps in activity of currently available third-generation cephalosporins such as cefotaxime, cefoperazone, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime, and increasing reports of gram-negative bacilli resistance to some of these agents, especially Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter spp., make it necessary to investigate new compounds. Cefepime, a fourth-generation cephalosporin with a wide range of activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, including multi-resistant strains of Enterobacteriaceae, was evaluated in comparison with ceftazidime for the treatment of serious infections in hospitalized patients. Ceftazidime is a commonly prescribed third-generation cephalosporin used for empiric treatment of serious infections such as pneumonia, urinary tract infection, and skin and skin-structure infection. This investigation was an open, randomized comparative study involving 882 patients in North America. Cefepime 2 g every 12 hours demonstrated similar efficacy to that of ceftazidime 2 g every 8 hours for the treatment of pneumonia and urinary tract infection (including cases associated with concurrent bacteremia), and skin and skin-structure infections. The bacteriologic responses were generally >85%. The most common pathogens isolated were Escherichia coll, Streptococcus pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, K. pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Streptococcus, group B. Overall, approximately 94% of pathogens isolated in pretreatment cultures were susceptible to cefepime and ceftazidime. Cefepime and ceftazidime were well tolerated; only 3% of patients in each group discontinued therapy because of an adverse event. The most common adverse events were headache, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, pruritus, and rash. The results of this study indicate that cefepime is a promising, effective, and safe single-agent therapy for serious infections in hospitalized patients.