BACKGROUND: Chlorambucil (CLB), 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine (2-CDA) and fludarabine (FAMP) are among the most widely used drugs in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Therefore we evaluated in vitro sensitivity to these drugs and cross-resistance of purine analogs. In addition, we correlated the in vitro data with the main clinico-hematological variables and surface markers. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighty CLL samples obtained from 63 untreated and 17 treated CLL patients were tested in vitro with the MTT assay. Lethal dose (LD)50 values were calculated to determine sensitivity to CLB, 2-CDA and FAMP. RESULTS: Samples were clustered either for a one-log increase of LD50 values or for LD50 threshold values of 3 microM for FAMP, 0.3 microM for 2-CDA and 7 microM for CLB, which correspond to the therapeutically achievable plasmatic levels of these drugs. A higher number of samples sensitive to 2-CDA were identified by the first approach; with the second method the relative order of sensitivity was FAMP > 2-CDA > CLB. Concerning 2-CDA and FAMP cross-resistance, out of 61 samples resistant to 2-CDA, 29.5% were sensitive to FAMP. Conversely, 13.9% out of 43 samples resistant to FAMP were sensitive to 2-CDA. No correlation was found between the main clinico-hematological features and the LD50 values of each drug either considering the whole series or only the untreated cases. In vitro drug sensitivity was also evaluated during the steady-state of the disease and at disease progression in six untreated cases. We observed a mean increase in the LD50 values of about 13, 38 and 22 times for CLB, FAMP and 2-CDA, respectively. Among the treated cases, the LD50 values of both purine analogs and CLB correlated with bone marrow histology. CLL cells expressing CD14, CD11c, CD11b, and FMC7 were more resistant in vitro to purine analogs but not to CLB. CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that i) the purine analogs exert a greater cytotoxic effect on CLL cells; ii) 2-CDA and FAMP are not cross-resistant in vitro in a percentage of CLL samples, iii) a possible change in LD50 values may be related to modification of the disease status, and iv) the expression of certain surface markers, which are CLL-unrestricted, identifies samples with higher in vitro resistance to purine analogs.