The pathophysiology associated with major burns is complex and subject to a state of flux. The combination of beta-lactamase inhibitors with powerful penicillins is an interesting and an attractive potential solution to the emergence of bacterial resistance. The kinetics in serum and urine and the clinical safety of a fixed combination of 4 g of piperacillin (PPR) and 0.5 g of tazobactam (TZB) were studied in 10 patients (22 to 50 years old and weighing 45 to 105 kg) with major burns who were infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and various entero-bacteria. All of them received additional antimicrobial drugs. Treatment involved one dose every 6 h. The mean body surface area affected by third-degree burns was 30.0% +/- 4.0%. The study took place in accordance with current ethical guidelines. Two series of blood samples were drawn after the first (day 1) and ninth (day 3 at steady state) doses; urine was collected during the same periods. Levels of PPR and TZB in serum and urine were measured by high-pressure liquid chromatography. A noncompartmental method was used for kinetic and graphic analysis of concentration-time pairs. The safety of the treatment was excellent. There was no systemic accumulation of the beta-lactam combination. Residual concentrations measured on days 1 and 3 [mean (standard error of the mean)] were above the MIC for the organism responsible for infection; i.e., C(min)day1 = 26.3 (8.5) and C(min)day3 = 21.0 (9.1) for PPR and C(min)day1 = 1.9 (0.6) and C(min)day3 = 1.4 (0.3) for TZB. There was no statistically significant difference between pharmacokinetic parameters determined for day 1 and day 3. Evidence was found in burn patients, in contrast to healthy subjects, of a marked increase in apparent volumes of distribution, in such a way that the apparent elimination half-lives of the combination were notably prolonged, i.e., 1.8 (0.3) versus 1.5 (0.3) h for PPR in patients and healthy subjects, respectively, and 1.7 (0.3) versus 1.4 (0.3) h for TZB. These findings indicate the possibility of nonrenal translesional diffusion of PPR-TZB in burn patients. The polarity of the association would further support this hypothesis. It has been shown here that the recommended dosage regimen for administration of PPR-TZB must be high in major-burn patients, i.e., 4 g/0.5 g every 6 h. The data obtained provide valuable information, which is suitable for immediate application in everyday clinical practice.