OBJECTIVES: To identify characteristics associated with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonization and infection, and to evaluate the efficacy of systemic and topical antimicrobials in the eradication of MRSA carriage among hospitalized patients. DESIGN: A case-control study was done to identify associations. Odds ratios were estimated by unconditional multiple logistic regression. Cohort study was done to evaluate MRSA decolonization efficacy by an oral regimen. Patients infected or colonized with MRSA received a 5-day course of oral (160 mg/800 mg) trimethoprim-sulfametroxazole twice daily and 600 mg of rifampin once daily as decolonization treatment. The proportion of MRSA-free patients after decolonization treatment was determined. Persistence of clearing was estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. SETTING: Ramon y Cajal Hospital, a 1,249-bed, tertiary-care teaching hospital in Madrid, Spain. PATIENTS: One hundred ninety-two patients with hospital-acquired MRSA infection/colonization and 195 MRSA-free random controls. RESULTS: Six factors were associated independently with MRSA infection/colonization: age (every 10 years of age, odds ratio [OR] = 1.3); ward (surgical, OR = 1; medical, OR = 3.1; intensive care unit, OR = 60); previous hospitalization (OR = 6.9); coma (OR = 25.3); invasive procedures (each, OR = 1.7); 3 or more weeks of hospitalization (OR = 3.8). We failed to show antibiotic therapy to be an independent risk factor for MRSA hospital infection/colonization. Overall, MRSA eradication was 64.2% by day 2 to 9 after completion of treatment. Kaplan-Meier product limit survival analysis showed that the probability of remaining MRSA-free was 65.3% (SE = 0.09) at 32 days after completion of treatment. CONCLUSIONS: The results offer a rationale for reduction of MRSA infection/colonization in the hospital by interventions aimed at early identification of patients at higher risk, at prompt discharge of patients, and at preventing dissemination while performing invasive procedures. They also provide estimates of antibiotic treatment efficacy to reduce the reservoir of MRSA in the hospital.