Hypothermia and ethanol are often closely linked and in hypothermic accidents ethanol is often a contributing factor. To study the effects of ethanol on the circulation in hypothermic conditions, cardiac catheterization was carried out on 18 anaesthetized beagle dogs. They were divided into two groups. One gram of ethanol/kg of b.wt. diluted in saline was infused into the vena cava superior within 30 min to seven dogs. The dogs were then cooled between ice bags until the blood temperature in the ascending aorta was 25 degrees C and they were then rewarmed. The control group of 11 dogs was cooled and rewarmed without ethanol infusion. The heart rate first increased when cooling down to 33 degrees C and decreased thereafter in the control group. In the ethanol group heart rate increased during the ethanol infusion and remained high when cooling down to 33 degrees C and decreased thereafter. Heart rate was higher in the ethanol group throughout the experiments, and during rewarming the difference was significant. In the control group cardiac output first increased until a body temperature of 33 degrees C was achieved but then decreased. In the ethanol group cardiac output started to decrease after ethanol infusion. During rewarming there was a significantly higher cardiac output in the ethanol group, probably due to the higher heart rate. In the cardiac cycle the systolic period prolonged significantly (p < 0.001) in both groups when the body temperature decreased from 37 degrees C to 25 degrees C whereas the diastolic period remained quite stable. The contraction phase was also affected by the cooling. The changes in contraction force cannot be seen in dP/dt alone because dP/dt values first increased significantly when cooling from 37 degrees C to 33 degrees C but then decreased. Ejection fraction, systolic period, and the systemic vascular resistance increased despite the reduction of the dP/dt and thus we conclude that the contraction force is augmented in hypothermia. In the ethanol group the myocardium seems to be depressed due to ethanol. In the early phase of cooling heart rate increased but cardiac output decreased in the ethanol group, indicating the decreased ability of the heart to respond to cooling in the presence of ethanol. The time constant of exponential pressure fall (tau) increased linearly with cooling from 37 degrees C to 25 degrees C and recovered with rewarming in both groups. Changes in negative dP/dt coincided with the changes in the time constant of exponential isovolumic pressure fall. Ethanol did not influence relaxation. All the parameters we checked recovered to normal during rewarming.