The various stages of Plasmodium falciparum (sporozoites and liver stages, asexual blood stages and gametocytes) each interact in a particular way with the human immune system. Specific immunity against the liver stages is achieved through a coordinated action of CD8 T cells and specific antibodies, the latter in collaboration with NK cells and macrophages. In this reaction, interferon-gamma plays an essential role. A non-specific "concomitant" immunity against sporozoites is based on a cytokine reaction, elicited by the blood stages. In practice, the high variability in the immunogenic structures of the sporozoite precludes completely protection against recurrent infections. The spleen macrophages have a pivotal role in the immune defense against the asexual blood stages. The elimination of merozoites and parasitized red blood cells (RBC) is facilitated by specific antibodies, produced under the control of CD4 T cells. There are, however, multiple mechanisms of immune deviation, suppression and evolutionary adaptation, which inhibit a sterilizing immunity against the blood stages. Nevertheless, symptoms may be absent in exposed adults, even when parasitemia persists. This clinical resistance, however, is relatively short-lived, once exposition is interrupted. The observation that HIV infection has no adverse effect on malaria also is a remarkable but consistent finding. All these data indicate that a strong T cell-mediated immune memory is absent in human P. falciparum infections. Cerebral malaria and some other serious complications are the consequence of insufficient elimination of parasitized erythrocytes by the spleen, presumably in combination with parasite factors (particular variant surface structures) and with human host genetics (HLA type, blood group etc.). Parasitized RBC massively stick to the endothelium of the micro-vessels and non-parasitized RBC roset around the parasitized ones. Eventually, serious problems in the micro-perfusion and in the local metabolism occur and organ failure may finally ensue. The immune reaction against the surface-antigens of the sexual stage is limited and insufficient, most probably for similar reasons as in the asexual stages. Internal structures of the gametocytes, however, are highly immunogenic, but, unfortunately. Normally cannot be reached by the immune system. Based on these fundamental data, some of the perspectives of vaccination and new therapeutic tools are critically discussed.