Bacteria isolated from lower respiratory tract infections were collected in cooperation with institutions located throughout Japan since 1981, and Ikemoto et al. have been investigating susceptibilities of the isolates to various antibacterial agents and antibiotics, and the relationships between the isolates and characteristics of the patients and so forth each year. We discuss the results in detail. In 20 institutions around the entire Japan from October 1992 to September 1993, 690 strains of bacteria were isolated mainly from sputa of 549 patients with lower respiratory tract infections and presumed to be the etiological bacteria. MICs of various antibacterial agents and antibiotics were determined against 101 strains of Staphylococcus aureus, 121 strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae, 122 strains of Haemophilus influenzae, 92 strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (non-mucoid), 32 strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (mucoid), 52 strains of Moraxella subgenus Branhamella catarrhalis, 28 strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae etc., and the drug susceptibilities of these strains were measured except the strains which died during transportation. 1. S. aureus S. aureus strains for which MICs of methicillin were higher than 4 micrograms/ml (methicillin-resistant S. aureus) accounted for 61.4% and the frequency of the drug resistant bacteria was higher than the previous year's 58.3%. MICs values indicated that arbekacin was as active as vancomycin against all the strains on S. aureus. 2. S. pneumoniae Benzylpenicillin among the penicillins showed potent activities against S. pneumoniae. Cefuzonam, cefazolin, cefotaxime and cefmenoxime among the cephems showed excellent antimicrobial activities against S. pneumoniae. Imipenem; carbapenems, showed the most potent activity, and MIC80 was 0.015 microgram/ml. 3. H. influenzae All the drugs tested were potent against H. influenzae. Ampicillin among the penicillins showed MIC80 1 microgram/ml against H. influenzae. Cefotaxime, cefmenoxime, cefuzonam and cefixime showed the most potent activities, and MIC80s were 0.063 microgram/ml. The antimicrobial activity of ofloxacin was equivalent to those of cephems. 4. P. aeruginosa (mucoid) Ciprofloxacin showed the most potent activity against P. aeruginosa (mucoid), and MIC80 was 1 microgram/ml. Cefsulodin, aztreonam, carumonam and tobramycin showed the next most potent activities with an MIC80s of 2 micrograms/ml. 5. P. aeruginosa (non-mucoid) Tobramycin and ciprofloxacin showed the highest activities against P. aeruginosa (non-mucoid) with an MIC80s of 2 micrograms/ml. Norfloxacin also showed some activity, and MIC80 was 4 micrograms/ml. Comparing to activities against P. aeruginosa (mucoid), all the drugs tested showed lower activities against P. aeruginosa (non-mucoid). 6. K. pneumoniae The activities of all drugs except penicillins were high activities against K. pneumoniae. Carumonam showed the most potent activity with an MIC80 of 0.063 microgram/ml, followed by flomoxef, cefixime and cefozopran with their MIC80s of 0.125 microgram/ml. 7. M.(B.) catarrhalis Imipenem; carbapenems, showed the most potent activity against M.(B.) catarrhalis with an MIC80 0.063 microgram/ml. Minocycline and ofloxacin showed MIC80s 0.125 microgram/ml, respectively. We also investigated year to year changes in the background of patients, as well as types of respiratory infectious diseases, and the etiological bacteria. As for patients backgrounds, there were many infectious diseases found among patients in a high age bracket, and the patients over age 60 accounted for 60.8% of the diseases. The distribution by lower respiratory tract infections was as follows: bacterial pneumonia and chronic bronchitis accounted for the greatest numbers of cases with 30.4%, 29.5%, respectively, followed by bronchiectasis with 12.2%. As for frequencies of etiologic bacteria for respiratory tract infections, H. influenzae: 22.2%, and S. pneumoniae: 15.1% in chronic bronchitis; S. pneumoniae: 2