The HIV protease (or proteinase) enzyme is an essential component of the replicative cycle of HIV, performing the post-transitional processing of the gag and gag-pol gene products into the functional core proteins and viral enzymes. Inhibition of this enzyme leads to production of immature noninfectious viral progeny, and hence prevention of further rounds of infection. Structurally, the enzyme is a homodimer consisting of two identical 99 amino acid chains. HIV protease is a member of the aspartic protease family but is structurally dissimilar to human aspartic proteases such as renin, gastricsin and cathepsin D and E, suggesting the possibility of creating inhibitors with a wide therapeutic index. At least 6 inhibitors of HIV protease are currently in clinical development: saquinavir, indinavir, ritonavir, nelfinavir (AG-1343), KNI-272 and VX-478, the first four of which have shown antiretroviral activity and acceptable tolerability in initial phase I/II clinical trials. Resistance or reduced sensitivity to the leading protease inhibitors has been reported in vivo and appears to be associated with loss of therapeutic effect. However, resistance patterns appear to be distinct. Treatment for 1 year with indinavir has been reported to lead to selection of virus in 4 patients, which was cross-resistant to all other leading protease inhibitors. On the other hand, a larger series of clinical isolates from patients receiving saquinavir alone or in combination with zidovudine for up to 3 years did not lead to virus cross-resistant to either indinavir or ritonavir. This suggests that care should be exercised in designing the sequence of protease usage. Additionally, differing resistance patterns may be used to select combinations of protease inhibitors in future trials. Data from studies combining protease inhibitors with nucleoside analogues suggest value in terms of larger and more prolonged virological and immunological marker responses than are observed with single agent therapy, and this is likely to be the primary role for protease inhibitors; both in initial combinations for patients commencing therapy and as add-in therapies for patients previously treated with antiretrovirals. However, in vitro and animal pharmacokinetic studies also give evidence of the possibility of combining protease inhibitors, potentially leading to improved bioavailability, antiviral synergy and delay in emergence of viral resistance.