Patient human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) isolates that are resistant to protease inhibitors may contain amino acid substitutions L10I/V, M46L/I, G-48V, L63P, V82A/F/T, I84V, and L90M in the protease gene. Substitutions at positions 82 and/or 90 occur in variants that display high levels of resistance to certain protease inhibitors. Nucleotide substitutions at these two sites also lead to the loss of two HindII restriction enzyme digestion sites, and these changes make possible a rapid procedure for the detection of drug-resistant variants in patients on protease inhibitor therapy. This procedure was used to detect the emergence of mutated viruses at various times after the initiation of therapy with the HIV-1 protease inhibitor indinavir. The method includes viral RNA isolation from plasma and reverse transcription PCR amplification of the protease gene with fluorescence-tagged primers. The PCR product is digested with HindII, the cleavage products are separated on a urea-acrylamide gel in a DNA sequencer, and the extent of cleavage is automatically analyzed with commercially available software. In viruses from 34 blood samples from four patients, mutations leading to an amino acid change at residue 82 appeared as early as 6 weeks after the start of therapy and persisted throughout the course of the study period (48 weeks). Mutations leading to double substitutions at residues 82 and 90 were seen at a lower frequency and appeared later than the change at position 82. The changes detected by restriction enzyme cleavage were confirmed by DNA sequencing of the cloned protease genes by reverse transcription PCR amplification of viral RNA from isolates in plasma. In addition to the changes at positions 82 and 90, we have identified M46L/I, G48V, and I54V substitutions in isolates derived from indinavir-treated patients. HindII analysis of uncloned, PCR-amplified DNA offers a rapid screening procedure for the detection of virus isolates containing mutations at amino acid residues 82 and 90 in the HIV-1 protease gene. By using other restriction enzymes, the same method can be used to detect additional protease drug-resistant variants and is generally applicable for the detection of mutations.