Levofloxacin, the active L-isomer of ofloxacin, has demonstrated strong activity against Staphylococcus aureus both in vitro and in vivo. In a murine model of hematogenous pyelonephritis, the in vivo efficacies of levofloxacin and ciprofloxacin were evaluated against two methicillin-susceptible and two methicillin-resistant S. aureus strains. All four isolates had virtually identical susceptibilities to levofloxacin and ciprofloxacin. Pyelonephritis was induced in carrageenan-primed mice by an intravenous injection of 0.5 ml of 10(7) CFU of methicillin-susceptible S. aureus isolates per ml or 10(8) CFU of methicillin-resistant S. aureus isolates per ml. At 1 h postinfection, the mice were treated orally with levofloxacin or ciprofloxacin once a day or twice a day (total daily dose of 20 to 160 mg/kg of body weight) for 4 days. Mice were euthanized 24 h after the final treatment, and the kidneys were excised and weighed. The kidneys were prepared for histological examination or were homogenized to determine the numbers of CFU per gram of tissue quantitatively. The reduction in the mean log10 number of CFU per gram as a function of total daily dose was recorded. A dose-response analysis showed that levofloxacin was superior to ciprofloxacin for all four isolates at any dose or regimen tested, independent of the methicillin susceptibility of the isolates. By using an inverse prediction technique, the equivalent effective doses of levofloxacin (once a day) were less than those of ciprofloxacin (twice a day) by 5.2 and 3.2 times, respectively, for methicillin-susceptible S. aureus 9039 and 3087. For methicillin-resistant S. aureus 667 and 2878, the equivalent effective doses of levofloxacin (once a day) were less than those of ciprofloxacin (twice a day) by 4.1 and 6.4 times, respectively. In a separate study, histological examination of all infected, untreated mice showed moderate to marked hematogenous pyelonephritis. Levofloxacin-treated mice (40 mg/kg once a day) showed no evidence of pyelonephritis in the kidneys, whereas the kidneys of mice treated with the same dose of ciprofloxacin showed only a reduction in the severity of the lesions. Treatment with ciprofloxacin (80 mg/kg twice a day) demonstrated a histology comparable to that of treatment with levofloxacin (40 mg/kg once a day). Levofloxacin (40 mg/kg once a day) reduced the log10 numbers of CFU per gram by 5 log10; however, ciprofloxacin (80 mg/kg twice a day) reduced the numbers of CFU per gram by only 3 log10. In the present murine model of pyelonephritis, levofloxacin was superior to ciprofloxacin in preventing pyelonephritis and eradicating S. aureus.