The pharmacodynamic effects of benzylpenicillin against Streptococcus pyogenes were studied in a new in vitro kinetic model in which bacterial outflow was prevented by a filter membrane. Following the administration of an initial dose of antibiotic, decreasing concentrations were produced by dilution of the medium. A magnetic stirrer was placed above the filter to avoid blockage of the membrane and to ensure homogeneous mixing of the culture. Repeated samplings were easily provided through a silicon diaphragm. Streptococci were exposed to a single dose corresponding to 1.5, 10, 100, or 500 x the MIC of benzylpenicillin and also to an initial concentration of 10 x the MIC of benzylpenicillin, followed by exposure to a repeated dose after 8 h yielding 10 or 1.5 x the MIC. Experiments were also performed with 10 x the MIC of benzylpenicillin with a half-life of 3 h or an initial half-life of 1.1 h that was altered to 3 h at the time point at which the antibiotic concentrations and MIC intersected. Bacterial killing and regrowth were followed by determining viable counts. The post-MIC effect (PME) was defined as the difference in time for the numbers of CFU in the culture vessel to increase 1 log10 CFU/ml, calculated from the numbers obtained at the time when the antibiotic concentration had declined to the MIC, and the corresponding time for a control culture, grown in a glass tube without antibiotic, to increase 1 log10 CFU/ml. To determine how much of the PME was attributable to subinhibitory concentrations, penicillinase was added to a part of the culture drawn from the flask at the time when the antibiotic concentration had fallen to the MIC. The longest PME was found in the experiments in which the half-life was extended from 1.1 to 3 h at the MIC. This illustrated that sub-MICs are sufficient to prevent regrowth. However, when the half-life was 3 h during the whole experiment, the PME was shorter, indicating that when concentrations decline slowly penicillin-binding proteins will already be present in amounts sufficient for regrowth at the time when the MIC is reached. The PME may prove to be a more reliable factor than the in vitro postantibiotic effect or postantibiotic sub-MIC effect for the design of optimal dosing schedules, since the PME, like the in vivo postantibiotic effect, includes the effects of subinhibitory concentrations and therefore better reflects the clinical situation with fluctuating antibiotic concentrations.