PURPOSE: An endothelialized lumen within a synthetic graft that expresses recombinant proteins with anticoagulant or antiproliferative activity has the potential to improve graft function. However, preliminary data suggest that genetic modification of endothelial cells (ECs) impairs their proliferation. The purpose of this investigation was to test the hypothesis that retroviral transduction of cultured ECs with the lac Z gene encoding for beta-galactosidase would decrease EC proliferation in vitro and graft endothelialization in vivo. METHODS: In vitro studies compared canine EC proliferation over a 14-day period among early-passage ECs (two and three) and late-passage ECs (six and nine) transduced with the BAG vector (containing the lac Z gene and the neomycin resistance gene), ECs transduced with the neomycin resistance gene only, the nontransduced ECs. In vivo canine studies assessed endothelialization of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene thoracoabdominal grafts seeded with autologous lac Z-transduced ECs (n = 7) or nontransduced ECs (n = 3) compared with that of nonseeded grafts (n = 3). Histochemical staining and DNA polymerase chain reaction was used 6 weeks after implantation to detect the presence of the lac Z gene in the grafts' cellular linings and perigraft tissues. Endothelialization was assessed by light microscopy and electron microscopy. RESULTS: Proliferation of late-passage lac Z-transduced ECs in vitro was significantly decreased compared with neomycin resistance-transduced ECs or nontransduced ECs. Among early-passage ECs smaller but significant decreases in proliferation were noted among lac Z-transduced cells compared with nontransduced cells. Six of seven expanded polytetrafluoroethylene grafts seeded with transduced ECs showed lac Z gene expression. Lac Z gene expression was not found on grafts seeded with nontransduced ECs or nonseeded grafts. The endothelialized luminal surface area was significantly less in grafts seeded with lac Z-transduced ECs compared with grafts seeded with nontransduced ECs. CONCLUSIONS: Retroviral-mediated transduction of canine ECs with the lac Z gene encoding for beta-galactosidase impairs EC proliferation in vitro and the ability of transduced ECs to form a confluent EC monolayer on the luminal surface of synthetic grafts in vivo.