To facilitate identification of the effector mechanism(s) responsible for gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-mediated host resistance to Legionella pneumophila, a murine model of legionellosis in BALB/c mice with a targeted disruption in the IFN-gamma gene (gamma knockout [GKO] mice) was developed. Immunocompetent BALB/c mice and GKO mice were inoculated intratracheally with virulent L. pneumophila (10(6) bacteria per mouse), and bacterial clearance and the pulmonary inflammatory response were assessed. L. pneumophila did not replicate in, and was rapidly cleared from, the lungs of immunocompetent BALB/c mice, demonstrating that immunocompetent BALB/c mice are resistant to replicative L. pneumophila pulmonary infections. In contrast, similarly infected GKO mice developed persistent, replicative intrapulmonary L. pneumophila infections with extrapulmonary dissemination of the bacteria to the spleen. Histopathologic and flow cytometric analysis of L. pneumophila-infected lung tissue demonstrated that while immunocompetent BALB/c mice develop multifocal pneumonitis which resolves, similarly infected GKO mice develop diffuse pneumonitis with persistent neutrophil recruitment into the lung. Intratracheal administration of exogenous IFN-gamma to L. pneumophila-infected GKO mice facilitated intrapulmonary clearance of the bacteria, confirming the pivotal role of IFN-gamma in innate host defenses to L. pneumophila lung infection in this murine host. The potential role of endogenous reactive nitrogen intermediates, including nitric oxide (NO), in IFN-gamma-mediated resistance to L. pneumophila pulmonary infections in immunocompetent BALB/c mice was subsequently assessed. Macrophage inducible nitric oxide synthetase (an enzyme responsible for the production of NO) was induced in alveolar cells from L. pneumophila-infected immunocompetent BALB/c mice (with maximal expression at 48 h postinfection) but was not induced in similarly infected GKO mice. However, administration of the NO synthetase inhibitor N-monomethyl-L-arginine did not significantly inhibit clearance of L. pneumophila from the lung of immunocompetent BALB/c mice (compared with that in similarly infected mice not administered N-monomethyl-L-arginine). In contrast, we have previously demonstrated that IFN-gamma-induced host resistance to replicative L. pneumophila lung infections in a susceptible murine host (A/J mice) is mediated, in part, by endogenous NO. Taken together, these studies identify a differing role of endogenous NO in IFN-gamma-mediated resistance to L. pneumophila pulmonary infection in susceptible and resistant murine hosts.