At high molar excess, verapamil can selectively increase the accumulation and cytotoxicity of structurally dissimilar natural product drugs in many multidrug-resistant tumor cell lines. Such concentrations of verapamil are also capable of increasing the accumulation and activity of chloroquine in chloroquine-resistant strains of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Despite such similarities, it is not clear why chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum is often susceptible to closely related compounds such as amodiaquine, whereas cancer cells are cross-resistant to many structurally unrelated drugs. For 13 aminoquinoline and aminoacridine compounds, relative drug resistance was negatively correlated with lipid solubility at physiological pH (r2 = 0.90, p < 0.0001). The ability of verapamil (5 microM) to reverse drug resistance was also negatively correlated with lipid solubility (r2 = 0.88, p < 0.0001). Furthermore, molar refractivity was weakly correlated with relative drug resistance (r2 = 0.46, p < 0.05) and reversal of drug resistance (r2 = 0.52, p < 0.005). Verapamil increases chloroquine accumulation by resistant parasites, a mechanism suggested to account for its selective chemosensitization effect. We show that the initial rate of chloroquine accumulation by resistant parasites is increased by verapamil. This effect of verapamil is abolished when deoxy-glucose is substituted for glucose. Therefore, verapamil produces an energy-dependent increase in the permeability of resistant parasites to chloroquine. For a panel of four chloroquine-resistant and two chloroquine-susceptible isolates, the effect of verapamil on the accumulation of chloroquine and monodesethyl amodiaquine was found to be correlated (r2 = 0.96, p < 0.001). Verapamil chemosensitization was also correlated for the two drugs (r2 = 0.92, p < 0.005), suggesting a common mechanism. In summary, the degree of drug resistance and the extent of verapamil chemosensitization for a particular drug seem to be dependent on general physical features such as lipid solubility and molar refractivity rather than on closely defined structural parameters. These studies provide insight into this important resistance mechanism of malaria parasites and may provide direction for the development of new drugs that are effective against resistant parasites.