More than 20 years ago, a shrewd clinician remarked, "There is little evidence that those antimicrobial agents which hypothetically or in vitro are more effective ... are superior in the treatment of otitis when compared to penicillin alone." Several hundred clinical trials later, the advantages of broad spectrum drugs remain unproved, and questions remains as to whether antibiotics are required for most episodes of AOM. Further, antibiotics have been demoted to the status of optional therapy for OME. This situation is unlikely to change as new studies with new antibiotics proliferate. What is clear, however, is that accelerated patterns of bacterial resistance mandate an evidence-based approach to managing otitis media. Bacteria have an uncanny ability to learn new mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. A large part of bacterial "education" has undoubtedly been fueled by antibiotic prescriptions from well-intentioned physicians, with unrealistic expectations of drug efficacy. A judicious approach to antibiotic treatment of otitis media can result only from knowing the spontaneous course of the disorder and incremental effect of antibiotics on clinical outcomes. In this article, a series of unifying concepts are developed to help practicing clinicians with an evidence-based approach to managing otitis media. Critical review of the published evidence suggests that the most favorable outcomes from medical treatment will occur if practitioners: appreciate the favorable natural history of untreated otitis media realize that OME may take months to resolve following a single AOM episode modify risk factors to improve the odds of spontaneous resolution use pneumatic otoscopy and confirmatory tympanometry to diagnose OME recognize the limited impact of antibiotic therapy on treatment and prevention balance the benefits of antibiotics against the risk of accelerated bacterial resistance avoid repetitive, prolonged, or prophylactic antibiotic treatment of chronic OME avoid ineffective therapy, such as antihistamine/decongestant preparations An important aspect of management is helping caregivers understand the natural history of otitis media and the impact of medical treatment on shortterm and long-term outcomes. Realistic expectations on the part of all involved parties should facilitate rational decisions about watchful waiting, medical therapy, and the need for surgical intervention.