UNLABELLED: Human recombinant interleukin 2 (IL-2), alone or in combination with other cytokines, is currently under investigation for the immunotherapy of metastatic tumours. Objective responses of 20-35% have been reported in patients with disseminated melanoma and renal cell carcinoma who received high-dose intravenous IL-2 in combination with interferon-alpha (IFN alpha). However, treatment with IL-2 is complicated by a syndrome of life-threatening adverse reactions such as disseminated vascular leakage, fluid retention, severe hypotension, and (reversible) multiple organ dysfunction (MODS). A systemic inflammatory reaction (SIRS/sepsis sepsis-like haemodynamic pattern has been described in patients after IL-2 bolus application alone. Our purpose was to study the haemodynamic changes in patients treated with high-dose IL-2 administered as a constant infusion and in combination with IFN alpha. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Haemodynamic variables were obtained during therapy courses of 11 patients (aged 48 to 71 years, median 61) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma receiving immunotherapy with IL-2/IFN alpha. Therapy consisted in IFN alpha 10 x 10(10) IU/m2 body surface area (BSA) once daily on days 1-5 i.m. on a regular ward, followed by IL-2 as a constant infusion of 18 x 10(6) IU/m2 BSA on days 6-11 in an intensive care unit (ICU). Haemodynamics were first measured after 5 days of IFN alpha application and transfer to the ICU on day 6, a further 24 h after the beginning of IL-2 infusion (day 7), and the end of the therapy course (days 10 and 11). Mean arterial pressure (MAP) was measured noninvasively using an oscillometric device (Dinamap, Critikon). Mixed-venous oxygen saturation (sv O2) was measured using an CO-oxymeter (OSM 3, Radiometer) and peripheral arterial oxygen saturation (psaO2) was recorded continuously with a pulse oximeter (Oxyshuttle, Critikon). In case of haemodynamic instability, stabilisation had priority over invasive haemodynamic measurements, so that nadir values of blood pressure (BP) did not influence mean MAP and are reported separately. Lactate values and criteria for SIRS were obtained before and during IL-2 infusion. Lactate measurements were performed using an enzymatic essay (Abbot FLx). The mean effect size of the haemodynamic values, SIRS criteria, and lactate concentrations during IL-2 infusion (days 6-11) were calculated, and 95% confidence intervals for the effect sizes are indicated. RESULTS: After their daily i.m. injections of IFN alpha, patients had short episodes of fever and tachycardia without significant drops in BP. A few hours after transfer to the ICU and continuous infusion of IL-2, they developed a syndrome of fever, tachycardia and tachypnoea. The haemodynamic values after 5 days of IFN alpha therapy remained in the normal range, whereas those during IL-2 infusion strongly resembled SIRS and sepsis, with a decrease in MAP (98 to 28 mm Hg) and systemic vascular resistance (SVR, 1477 to 805 dyn.s.cm-5) and an increase in cardiac output (cardiac index 2.8 to 4.3 l.min-1.m-2). MAP often had to be stablilized with colloids during the last 48 h of therapy; 5 patients had nadir values below 60 mm Hg, or 30% below basic values in hypertensive patients. Catecholamine therapy became mandatory in 1 patient and therapy had to be discontinued. Surprisingly, some patients already had elevated plasma lactate concentrations after IFN alpha therapy. During IL-2 infusion mean plasma lactate levels increased from 2.3 to 3.2 mmol.l-1 and all patients had lactate concentrations above 2.0 mmol.l-1 at the end of therapy. During the last 48 to 72 h of IL-2 infusion, patients suffered from MODS with altered mental state (7 patients), oliogoanuria (all patients), cardiac dysrhythmias (4 patients), congestive heart failure (1 patient, which led to a second case of therapy interruption), elevated bilirubin (4 patients), and pulmonary dysfunction. In 9 patients supplementary oxygen was necessary when psaO2 fell below 92