Recently, a reduction in the incidence of pristane-induced plasmacytomas in BALB/cAnPt (BALB/c) mice that were kept in viral specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions has been reported. Environmentally, these SPF-BALB/c mice differed from conventionally-housed (CON) mice only in viral exposure and diet (i.e. sterilization of mouse chow), since microbial colonization of the intestinal tract was seen to be equivalent. This report assessed the ability of SPF- and CON-BALB/c mice to respond to immunologic challenge with soluble antigen, i.e. hen egg white lyzosyme (HEL), as a means of evaluating differences in T and B cell function and, indirectly, evaluating the possible effects these differences might have on plasmacytoma development. When cultured in vitro for 5 days with HEL, HEL-primed lymph node cells (LNC) from SPF-BALB/c mice proliferated to a significantly lesser extent than HEL-primed CON-BALB/c LNC. Moreover, HEL-induced production of IFN-gamma and IL-5 was significantly lower in SPF LNC. Serum IgG1 levels were 10-fold lower in SPF-BALB/c mice with, or without prior immunization with HEL and were not reconstituted by repeated injections of HEL in adjuvant. Serum IgM levels of SPF- and CON-BALB/c mice were equivalent. This reduction in immune responses could not be attributed to a lack of colonization of secondary lymphoid organs, since flow cytometric analysis of LNC revealed no difference in the number of recoverable cells and the proportion of lymphocyte subsets (CD4+, CD8+ and CD45+ cells) obtained from SPF- and CON-BALB/c mice. However, only CON LNC were induced to increase surface expression of CD44 after antigenic or mitogenic stimulation in vitro. Antibody responsiveness to HEL, as evidenced by serum anti-HEL binding or splenic hybridoma studies, demonstrated higher levels of IgG1 antibodies in CON BALB/c mice than in SPF mice. However, a greater proportion of the SPF IgG1 antibodies present were specifically directed against HEL, so that specific activity was greater in SPF-BALB/c mice. Therefore, while SPF BALB/c mice have a more restricted response to HEL than CON-BALB/c mice, those antibodies that are produced are more specifically directed against HEL with very little apparent bystander/polyclonal activation of multireactive cells. Resistance to plasmacytomas in SPF-BALB/c mice, therefore, may stem from a reduced number of circulating memory T and B cells, which are capable of reacting and/or crossreacting with a chronic inflammatory stimulus.