In this report, we present MIC, bactericidal activity, postantibiotic effect (PAE), and in vivo infectivity data for postantibiotic-phase pneumococci. We compared and evaluated penicillin G and six macrolides, erythromycin, azithromycin, clarithromycin, dirithromycin, roxithromycin, and spiramycin, against 10 strains of pneumococci with various levels of susceptibility to penicillin. All of the agents, except azithromycin, exhibited a bactericidal effect (a > or = 3 log10 decrease in the number of CFU per milliliter) after 4 h of exposure to a concentration equal to 10 times the MIC, displaying the following hierarchy: spiramycin = penicillin G = erythromycin = dirithromycin = clarithromycin = roxithromycin > azithromycin. The bactericidal rate of penicillin G was significantly lower for resistant strains (MIC, > or = 2 microg/ml), while bactericidal rates of macrolides were unaffected by penicillin susceptibility. A PAE was induced in all of the strains by all of the antibiotics after exposure for 1 h to a concentration equivalent to 10 times the MIC. The mean duration of PAEs varied between 2.3 and 3.9 h, showing the following hierarchy: spiramycin = dirithromycin = clarithromycin = erythromycin = roxithromycin > azithromycin > penicillin G. Virulence studies were performed with immunocompetent mice by intraperitoneal inoculation of virulent, penicillin-susceptible serotype 3 pneumococci which had been pre-exposed to penicillin G or a macrolide for 1 h. A significant decrease in the virulence of postantibiotic-phase pneumococci was induced only by erythromycin, azithromycin, dirithromycin, and spiramycin, displaying 5.9-, 7.1-, 4.2-, and 3.6-fold increases in the 50% lethal dose (LD50) compared to a control suspension, respectively. No significant correlation could be demonstrated between the LD50 and the MIC, bactericidal activity, or PAE duration. These results suggest that antimicrobial interaction with host defenses in terms of virulence might be a significant parameter that could influence the drug or drug regimen of choice.