Tuberculosis has been a disease of human beings for thousands of years. In recent times it has waxed to become the feared White Plague of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and waned under the impact of effective chemotherapy until its elimination seemed possible by the early twenty-first century. The resurgence of tuberculosis in the past 10 to 15 years, caused by unanticipated events such as the appearance of the human immunodeficiency virus and deteriorating social conditions, also brought with it the problem of multiple drug resistance. Control measures such as tuberculin skin testing, perhaps somewhat forgotten when tuberculosis seemed to be a disease of the past, again became first-line defenses against spread of the disease. Environmental controls must be well understood and used effectively. Diagnosis of tuberculosis requires knowledge of the strengths and shortcomings of the various diagnostic methods and experience in their use. Practitioners are cautioned to remember that no diagnostic method, by itself, can be relied on to confirm or rule out tuberculosis. Well-tested diagnostic methods of chest radiograph, tuberculin skin testing, smear, and culture have been recently supplemented by rapid diagnostic tests based on amplification of bacterial RNA and DNA. More invasive diagnostic methods are sometimes required to diagnose extrapulmonary disease. Two-drug up to seven-drug therapy may be indicated for a case of tuberculosis, depending on evidence of the presence of multiple drug resistance. Duration of treatment can range from 6 to 12 months, also depending on identification of drug-sensitive or drug-resistant organisms. Failure of compliance can be a significant problem in patients who are homeless, or drug abusers, or who for various reasons cannot or will not complete a course of therapy. Directly observed therapy is strongly recommended for these patients, and for assistance in its administration the physician must cooperate with the local or state health department. The health department also must be notified whenever a case of tuberculosis is identified.