OBJECTIVE: To determine the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) to methicillin and compare it with the type of methicillin resistance in methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) isolated from clinical samples, and to evaluate the usefulness of beta-lactamase resistant penicillins such as cloxacillin for treatment of minor MRSA infections. DESIGN: Sixty-five strains of MRSA isolated from clinical samples were studied. Homogeneous and heterogeneous resistance to methicillin of these strains was determined by an efficiency of plating technique. The MICs to methicillin of all homogeneously resistant strains and an equal number of heterogeneously resistant strains were determined by the 'E' test. SETTING: General Hospital, Colombo; De Soysa Maternity Hospital for Women; Lady Ridgeway Hospital for Children. RESULTS: 171 strains of S aureus were isolated from specimens processed in the laboratory of the Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Colombo, during a 14-month period. Seventy (40.9%) were methicillin resistant. Fifty-three MRSA strains (81.5%) were heterogeneously resistant to methicillin. Only 12 of 65 strains were homogeneously resistant. Nine of 12 of the homogeneously resistant strains were from surgical wards. MICs for methicillin in the two groups were compared. Six of 12 (50%) homogeneously resistant strains had very high levels of resistance to methicillin (MIC > 200 micrograms/ml). In contrast the MICs of all the heterogeneously resistant strains ranged from 16 micrograms/ml to 96 micrograms/ml. CONCLUSIONS: The majority of clinical isolates of MRSA from hospitals in Colombo, Sri Lanka were heterogeneously resistant to methicillin with lower MICs for methicillin than the homogeneously resistant strains. Thus, beta-lactamase resistance penicillins such as cloxacillin may have a place in the treatment of minor MRSA infections. Surveillance studies to determine if there is an increase of homogeneously methicillin resistant MRSA are required.