Genetic factors are known to influence the preference for drinking alcohol-in humans as well as certain inbred strains of laboratory animals. Here we examined the possible role of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in alcohol-preferring C57BL/6J (B6, high-affinity AHR) and alcohol-avoiding DBA/2J (D2, low-affinity AHR) inbred mouse strains, and in the two congenic lines B6.D2-Ahrd (> 99% B6 genome with the D2 low-affinity AHR) and D2.B6-Ahrb-1 (> 99% D2 genome with the B6 high-affinity AHR). This laboratory had previously shown an association between resistance to intraperitoneal ethanol-induced toxicity and the high-affinity AHR. Offering the choice between drinking water and 10% ethanol, we found that alcohol preference is three- to four-fold greater in B6 than D2 mice, as well as three- to four-fold greater in B6.D2-Ahrd than D2.B6-Ahrb-1 mice-indicating that alcohol preference is AHR-independent. The prototype AHR agonist 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD; dioxin) did not affect the rates of chronic alcohol consumption in B6 or D2 mice, suggesting that dioxin-inducible metabolism does not play a major role in alcohol drinking preference. In B6 mice, we found that oral treatment with the aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) inhibitor disulfiram decreased alcohol preference by 50%, whereas oral treatment of the catalase inhibitor 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole increased alcohol drinking preference by 15-20%. Although liver and brain ALDH activities were both significantly higher in D2 than B6, these activities were not related to alcohol consumption. Hepatic and brain catalase activities, on the other hand, were two- to three-fold higher in D2 and D2.B6-Ahrb-1 mice, compared with that in B6 and B6.D2-Ahrd. Furthermore, brain acetaldehyde levels were inversely related to the quantity of alcohol voluntarily consumed. We conclude that the alcohol drinking preference between the B6 and D2 inbred mouse strains is independent of the Ah receptor-but is genetically determined, in part, by the level of brain catalase activity which, in turn, regulates brain acetaldehyde concentrations.