BACKGROUND: The most effective therapy for non-typhoid Salmonella enterocolitis is still unknown. Traditionally, unless extraintestinal complications are present, antimicrobial drugs are not recommended, since earlier trials have shown that antibiotics such as ampicillin, chloramphenicol, or co-trimoxazole, do not shorten the duration of diarrhea and may even prolong convalescent fecal carriage of the bacteria. However, the recently-developed third generation cephalosporin ceftriaxone has been used successfully in the treatment of typhoid fever and other systemic salmonellosis. A controlled, pilot study was therefore undertaken to evaluate the efficacy of intravenous ceftriaxone in the treatment of children with non-typhoid Salmonella enterocolitis. METHODS: Fifteen children with Salmonella enterocolitis and bacteremia who were eligible for antibiotic therapy were given ceftriaxone intravenously for 7 days and 15 children with enterocolitis but without bacteremia who were admitted for supportive treatment during the study period were selected as the control group. Available stool samples collected on days, 7, 14, and 30 after the completion of the drug therapy were checked for the presence of the bacteria using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and culture methods. RESULTS: The result showed that the duration of diarrhea was not significantly affected by ceftriaxone treatment. However, the difference in the rate of clearance of Salmonella from stools, as defined by negative stool cultures and PCR, was statistically significant between the two groups on posttreatment days 7 and 14. Only one patient given ceftriaxone was shown to have recrudescence of the bacteria in feces on day 14. One month after therapy, PCR was positive in two of the ten cases tested and one of these two experienced a relapse of diarrhea, whereas bacterial carriage was maintained in 63% of the control patients. CONCLUSION: A prompt eradication of Salmonella in feces was observed in most of the patients treated with ceftriaxone in this study. If further studies confirm the efficacy of this therapy and the risk of inducing drug resistance is minimal, the epidemiologic problem created by convalescent fecal bacterial carriage may justify a short-course of ceftriaxone therapy for children with Salmonella enterocolitis.