The activities of glycopeptides against pneumococci were studied in vitro and in vivo. The MICs of two glycopeptides, vancomycin and teicoplanin, in different media against 10 strains of pneumococci with different susceptibilities to penicillin were determined. The MICs of teicoplanin were four times lower than those of vancomycin in Mueller-Hinton media supplemented with 5% blood, but the MICs were similar in mouse and human sera supplemented with 5% blood. The serum protein binding levels in mouse and human sera were 90% for teicoplanin in both and 25 and 35%, respectively, for vancomycin. The MICs for vancomycin and teicoplanin were only correlated in human serum (P < 0.001). The single doses giving protection to 50% of the animals in the mouse peritonitis model after a lethal challenge of pneumococci, the ED50s, were similar for vancomycin and teicoplanin, between 0.1 and 1 mg/kg of body weight for all 10 strains. The log ED50s were significantly correlated only to the log MICs of teicoplanin determined for mouse serum with 5% blood (P = 0.01) and to the log MICs of vancomycin determined by the E test (P = 0.03). Among the pharmacokinetic parameters analyzed at the ED50s, the most constant parameter was the time for which the drug concentration exceeded the MIC (T(>MIC)) when each drug was considered separately; however, when both drugs were considered together, the maximum concentration of drug in serum (Cmax) varied the least. This indicates that both these parameters are of importance for predicting the effect of the drugs. We conclude that the effect of glycopeptides was not influenced by the penicillin resistance of the pneumococci, either in vitro or in vivo, and that the superior activity of teicoplanin over that of vancomycin in vitro was abolished in vivo, an effect which probably was due to the high serum protein binding of teicoplanin. Both the pharmacokinetic parameters T(>MIC) and Cmax are important predicting the effect of glycopeptides, but the pharmacodynamics of glycopeptides are still not completely elucidated.