The pgip-1 gene of Phaseolus vulgaris, encoding a polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein (PGIP), PGIP-1 (P. Toubart, A. Desiderio, G. Salvi, F. Cervone, L. Daroda, G. De Lorenzo, C. Bergmann, A. G. Darvill, and P. Albersheim, Plant J. 2:367-373, 1992), was expressed under control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter in tomato plants via Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation. Transgenic tomato plants with different expression levels of PGIP-1 were used in infection experiments with the pathogenic fungi Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici, Botrytis cinerea, and Alternaria solani. No evident enhanced resistance, compared with the resistance of untransformed plants, was observed. The pgip-1 gene was also transiently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana with potato virus X (PVX) as a vector. PGIP-1 purified from transgenic tomatoes and PGIP-1 in crude protein extracts of PVX-infected N. benthamiana plants were tested with several fungal polygalacturonases (PGs). PGIP-1 from both plant sources exhibited a specificity different from that of PGIP purified from P. vulgaris (bulk bean PGIP). Notably, PGIP-1 was unable to interact with a homogeneous PG from Fusarium moniliforme, as determined by surface plasmon resonance analysis, while the bulk bean PGIP interacted with and inhibited this enzyme. Moreover, PGIP-1 expressed in tomato and N. benthamiana had only a limited capacity to inhibit crude PG preparations from F. oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici, B. cinerea, and A. solani. Differential affinity chromatography was used to separate PGIP proteins present in P. vulgaris extracts. A PGIP-A with specificity similar to that of PGIP-1 was separated from a PGIP-B able to interact with both Aspergillus niger and F. moniliforme PGs. Our data show that PGIPs with different specificities are expressed in P. vulgaris and that the high-level expression of one member (pgip-1) of the PGIP gene family in transgenic plants is not sufficient to confer general, enhanced resistance to fungi.