LY333328 is a semisynthetic N-alkyl derivative of LY264826, a naturally occurring structural analog of vancomycin. LY333328 was evaluated for its in vitro inhibitory and bactericidal activities in comparison with those of the two currently available glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin). Glycopeptide-susceptible test strains included a total of 311 isolates (most of clinical origin) from the genera Staphylococcus, Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Aerococcus, Gemella, Lactococcus, Listeria, Corynebacterium, and Clostridium. Test strains resistant or intermediate to vancomycin and/or teicoplanin included 56 clinical isolates of Enterococcus (of the VanA, VanB, and VanC phenotypes) and 32 clinical isolates of Staphylococcus (S. haemolyticus, S. epidermidis, and S. aureus), 31 strains of gram-positive genera outside the spectrum of activity of vancomycin (Leuconostoc, Pediococcus, Lactobacillus, and Erysipelothrix), and laboratory-derived organisms obtained after exposure of susceptible Staphylococcus isolates to teicoplanin (6 strains) or laboratory-derived organisms with resistance determinants received from VanA enterococci (2 Enterococcus and 25 Listeria transconjugants). LY333328 was highly active against staphylococci, enterococci, and listeriae (whether they were clinical or laboratory-derived strains) resistant to the currently available glycopeptides. In particular, the MICs of LY333328 did not vary substantially between teicoplanin-susceptible and teicoplanin-resistant staphylococci and between vancomycin-susceptible and vancomycin-resistant enterococci. LY333328 demonstrated fairly good inhibitory activity even against most strains of Leuconostoc, Pediococcus, and Erysipelothrix (MIC range, 1 to 8 microg/ml), whereas it proved less active (although much more active than vancomycin or teicoplanin) against Lactobacillus strains. In minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) and time-kill studies, LY333328 demonstrated excellent bactericidal activity; enterococci, in particular, which were largely tolerant of vancomycin and teicoplanin, were uniformly killed by LY333328, with MBC-to-MIC ratios of 4 to 8 for most vancomycin-susceptible and vancomycin-resistant strains. In attempts to select for resistant clones, no survivors stably growing in the presence of 10 microg of LY333328 per ml were obtained from the Staphylococcus and Enterococcus test strains exposed to the drug.