Antifolates such as methotrexate (MTX) and trimetrexate (TMTX) are widely used in the treatment of cancer and nonmalignant disorders. Transient, yet sometimes severe myelosuppression is an important limitation to the use of these drugs. It has previously been shown that clonogenic myeloid progenitors and colony-forming units-spleen are resistant to antifolates, suggesting that myelotoxicity occurs late in hematopoietic development. The goal of this study was to define the mechanisms by which primitive hematopoietic cells resist the toxic effects of antifolate drugs. To test the hypothesis that myeloid progenitors may salvage extracellular nucleotide precursors to resist TMTX toxicity, a defined liquid culture system was developed to measure TMTX toxicity in expanding progenitor populations. These in vitro experiments showed that both human and murine progenitors can resist TMTX toxicity by importing thymidine and hypoxanthine from the serum. As predicted from these findings, several drugs that block thymidine transport sensitized progenitors to TMTX in vitro, although to differing degrees. These nucleoside transport inhibitors were used to test whether progenitors and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) could be sensitized to TMTX in vivo. Treatment of mice with TMTX and nitrobenzylmercaptopurineriboside phosphate (NBMPR-P), a potent transport inhibitor, caused significant depletions of clonogenic progenitors within the bone marrow (20-fold) and spleen (6-fold). Furthermore, NBMPR-P administration dramatically sensitized HSCs to TMTX, with dual-treated mice showing a greater than 90% reduction in bone marrow repopulating activity. These studies demonstrate that both myeloid progenitor cells and HSCs resist TMTX by using nucleotide salvage mechanisms and that these pathways can be pharmacologically blocked in vivo using nucleoside transport inhibitors. These results have important implications regarding the use of transport inhibitors for cancer therapy and for using variants of dihydrofolate reductase for in vivo selection of genetically modified HSCs.