The immune response to infection with M. tuberculosis depends on cytokine activation of effector cells. We therefore conducted a pilot study of recombinant human interleukin-2 (rhuIL-2) as an adjunct to multidrug therapy (MDT) to evaluate the safety of this approach and to determine whether IL-2 can enhance the cellular immune response in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis (TB). Patients included in this study presented with a wide range of extent and duration of infection, and were grouped into three categories for data analysis: (1) patients with newly diagnosed, acute-stage TB who were just beginning MDT; (2) patients who had received a minimum of 45 days MDT before the start of the study and who had responded to treatment; and (3) patients with multidrug-resistant (MDR) TB who had been on MDT for at least seven months without apparent beneficial clinical response. Twenty patients received 30 days of twice-daily intradermal injections of 12.5 micrograms of IL-2. Patients from all three groups showed improvement of clinical symptoms over the 30-day period of treatment with IL-2 and MDT. Results of direct smear for acid fast bacilli (AFB) demonstrated conversion to sputum-negative following IL-2 and MDT treatment in all newly diagnosed patients and in 5/7 MDR TB patients. (The size of the skin test response to purified protein derivative (PPD) of tuberculin increased during the 30-day IL-2 adjunctive therapy in newly diagnosed patients, but decreased or disappeared in the other two groups of treated patients.) Assays in vitro for phenotype distribution, natural killer (NK) cell activity, frequency of cells proliferating in response to exogenous IL-2, and antigen-induced blastogenesis demonstrated systemic responses to intradermally administered rhuIL-2. Levels of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in plasma, peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) IFN-gamma mRNA and IFN-gamma mRNA in biopsy of site of skin test response to purified protein derivative (PPD) were highest in those patients with the most acute symptoms at the beginning of the study, and decreased during rhuIL-2 and MDT. IL-2 immunotherapy did not modify levels of mRNA expression for other cytokines. Patients receiving IL-2 did not experience clinical deterioration or significant side effects. These results suggest that IL-2 administration in combination with conventional MDT is safe and may potentiate the antimicrobial cellular immune response to TB.