The recent increases in the prevalence of penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae becomes a point at issue clinically. We carried out a clinical study in 40 cases in the pediatrics department, as faropenem (FRPM) was proved to have an excellent antimicrobial activity against penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae. The study was planned to investigate in detail the movement of stools that had been a problem in a clinical development studies out before. In this study, an observation of the daily movement of stools was one of the principal evaluation items, hence the patients were divided into two groups. One group (S-group) were administered FRPM only, the other group (E-group) were administered FRPM in combination with a medicine for intestinal disorders (Enteronon-R). An observed frequencies of any loose bowel movements were 94.7% in S-group, and 63.2% in E-group, hence the study suggested that the combination drug was effective. The patients observed higher frequencies of development of the movement of stools, all of them were recovered from in the course of administration or within 4 days after administration, however whether or not being treated symptomatic therapy. Clinical efficacy rates of FRPM on mainly respiratory infections were 94.6%. In this study, 4 strains (patients) of penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae were isolated. Against penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae, FRPM demonstrated more potent antibacterial activity than the oral penicillins and cephems tested here except cefditoren. Clinical efficacies was deemed effective in all of the 4 cases, and bacteriologically, 3 organisms were eradicated. As for side effects including diarrhea and loose stool, no serious side effects were observed. Based on the above results, FRPM is effective against most infections in the pediatric field which Streptococcus pneumoniae are isolated at high frequencies highly, and is considered to cases in be useful an attention will have to be paid to stool movement, however.