We investigated clinical and bacteriological effects of cefetamet pivoxil (CEMT-PI) in community-acquired respiratory tract infections and obtained the following findings. That method was approximately equal to that of investigation in 1994. 1. Of the 431 respiratory tract infection cases that were treated with CEMT-PI according to a same protocol at a total of 41 institutions in Tokyo, Kanagawa-ken, Saitama-ken and Chiba-ken from January to the beginning of March 1996. Outpatients accounted for 98.1% of the subjects. Regarding genders to patients, slightly more females (52.6%) than males were included. Diagnoses given to these patients included pharyngo-laryngitis (53.5%), tonsillitis (20.4%) and acute bronchitis (19.1%). 2. We investigated clinical efficacy rates (the ratio of those excellent + good) classified by diseases. The improvement rates of pharyngo-laryngitis, tonsillitis and acute bronchitis were more than 85.0%. Other cases were small in number. That of chronic bronchitis-acute increasing change for the worse was 66.7%, pneumonia was 50.0% and bronchiectasis infection was 16.7%. It was not studied that clinical efficacy rates among those who were treated with 1 CEMT-PI tablet twice and among those who were given 2 tablets twice were significant level. 3. For the bacteriological study, a written material describing the method of collecting specimens, storage and transport in detail was distributed to the above mentioned institutions. The isolation and identification of suspected causative bacteria, determination of minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) and investigation of beta-lactamase production were conducted all together at section of studies, Tokyo Clinical Research Center. Suspected causative bacteria were detected from 274 (63.6%) cases. They included 88 strains of Haemophilus influenzae, 47 strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae, 42 strains of Streptococcus pyogenes, 20 strains of Moraxella subgenus Branhamella catarrhalis and 17 strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae. Suspected causative bacteria classified by diseases were S. pyogenes (tonsillitis), S. pneumoniae (acute bronchitis and secondary infection of chronic respiratory infection) and H. influenzae (pharyngo-laryngitis), and the detection frequency of those was high. The clinical efficacies (the ratio of improvement) classified by suspected causative bacteria were 84.4% against organism that was indicating CEMT and were 69.2% against organism that was not indicating CEMT.