The heavy metal lead (Pb) has been shown to downregulate various parameters of cell-mediated immune (CMI) responses. This inhibition of CMI responses by Pb is exemplified by a higher mortality rate upon infections with sublethal doses of a variety of pathogens. Unlike Pb, which lowers host resistance, interleukin-12 (IL-12) exerts a substantial stimulatory influence on the host response to intracellular bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes. To explore the influence of IL-12 in mice rendered susceptible to Listerial infection by oral exposure to Pb, we determined bacterial burdens and production of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma). As expected, Pb-exposed mice had increased morbidity due to higher Listerial titers as compared to control mice. However, administration of exogenous IL-12 reversed the Pb-induced inhibition of host defense and boosted the resistance of the non-Pb-treated mice. The enhanced CMI responses observed in both IL-12-treated groups were accompanied with elevations of IFN-gamma in the sera and spleens. Significant reduction in the number of viable Listeria in Pb-exposed mice upon IL-12 administration suggests that the processes downstream of IL-12 production were intact in the Pb-exposed mice and that the inhibition by Pb was due to the lack of functional IL-12. Alternatively, the exogenous IL-12 may have overcome a downstream effect by enhancing an secondary pathway. Support for the former hypothesis is based on the observation that Pb induced elevated levels of p40 splenic messenger RNA since increased p40 expression would result from lack of IL-12 formation. Contrary to the IFN-gamma levels, significantly higher levels of IL-6 and corticosterone were observed in the sera and spleens of Pb-exposed mice upon infection, suggesting heightened stress in the absence of IL-12. Overall, the results suggest that an environmental pollutant such as Pb can enhance the stress response, which naturally occurs during an infection, and can further compromise health by lowering host resistance by altering cytokine levels.