Linoleic acid hydroperoxide (LoaOOH) formed during free radical attack on long-chain unsaturated fatty acids is an important source of biomembrane damage and is implicated in the onset of atherosclerosis, hepatic diseases, and food rancidity. LoaOOH is toxic to wild-type Saccharomyces cerevisiae at a very low concentration (0.2 mM) relative to other peroxides. By using isogenic mutant strains, the possible roles of glutathione (gsh1 and gsh2), glutathione reductase (glr1), respiratory competence ([rho0] petite), and yAP-1p-mediated expression (yap1) in conferring LoaOOH resistance have been examined. Respiration-related processes were essential for maximal toxicity and adaptation, as evidenced by the fact that the [rho0] petite mutant was most resistant to LoaOOH but could not adapt. Furthermore, when respiration was blocked by using inhibitors of respiration and mutants defective in respiratory-chain components, cells became more resistant. An important role for reduced glutathione and yAP-1 in the cellular response to LoaOOH was shown, since the yap1 and glr1 mutants were more sensitive than the wild type. In addition, total glutathione peroxidase activity increased following treatment with LoaOOH, indicating a possible detoxification role for this enzyme. Yeast also showed an adaptive response when pretreated with a nonlethal dose of LoaOOH (0.05 mM) and subsequently treated with a lethal dose (0.2 mM), and de novo protein synthesis was required, since adaptation was abolished upon treatment of cells with cycloheximide (25 microg ml-1). The wild-type adaptive response to LoaOOH was independent of those for the superoxide-generating agents paraquat and menadione and also of those for the organic hydroperoxides cumene hydroperoxide and tert-butyl hydroperoxide. Pretreatment with LoaOOH induced resistance to hydrogen peroxide, while pretreatment of cells with malondialdehyde (a lipid peroxidation product) and heat shock (37 degrees C) gave cross-adaptation to LoaOOH, indicating that yeast has effective overlapping defense systems that can detoxify fatty acid hydroperoxides directly or indirectly.