One group (145 isolates) of Neisseria gonorrhoeae was collected from municipal clinics in Bloemfontein in 1994 and a second group (65 isolates) in 1995. Penicillin and tetracycline MICs were determined and plasmid analysis performed to monitor antimicrobial susceptibilities in conjunction with the occurrence of plasmids in these isolates. The prevalence of penicillin resistance caused by beta-lactamase plasmids remained constant at 9% during the study period. Three high-level tetracycline-resistant strains (MICs 16 mg/L), the first to be detected in South Africa, were isolated in 1994. Although there was a reduction in the percentage of isolates harbouring 24.5 MDa conjugative plasmids (from 79% in 1994 to 46% in 1995), this was partially counteracted by an increase in TetM-encoding conjugative plasmids (25.2 MDa) from 2% to 18.5%. The tetM genes of 13 isolates shown to exhibit high-level tetracycline resistance were characterized as the American type. The American-type tetracycline resistance plasmid was demonstrated in 11 isolates. Digestion with Bg/l showed that two isolates harboured tetM-encoding plasmids that differed from the American- and Dutch-type plasmids described previously: one isolate contained a plasmid that produced two fragments of different sizes from those of the American-type plasmid and the second isolate possessed an American/Dutch hybrid plasmid. Auxotyping/serotyping and random amplified polymorphic DNA analysis revealed a predominant tetracycline-resistant family (NR/IA-6, genomic group I) in Bloemfontein. As there is a high incidence of chlamydial infections in southern Africa requiring tetracycline therapy, selective pressures exist in the environment for the maintenance and rapid spread of high-level tetracycline-resistant N. gonorrhoeae. It is possible that tetM genes may have emanated from Botswana and/or Namibia to Bloemfontein. The establishment of high-level tetracycline-resistant N. gonorrhoeae in Bloemfontein was seen to be complex as a related group of strains was identified, plasmid dissemination was evident and two new TetM-encoding plasmids were demonstrated. The appearance of these TetM-encoding plasmids indicates either that the American- and Dutch-type plasmids are continuing to evolve or that tetM genes are being introduced into different families of 24.5 MDa conjugative plasmids.