In the absence of evidence that eradication of HIV from an infected individual is feasible, the established goal of antiretroviral therapy is to reduce viral load to as low as possible for as long as possible. Achieving this with the currently available antiretroviral agents involves appropriate selection of components of combination regimens to obtain an optimal antiviral response. In addition, consideration of a plan for a salvage or second-line regimen is required if initial therapy fails to achieve an optimal response or should loss of virological control occur despite effective initial therapy. Such a planned approach, based on consideration of the likely modes of therapeutic failure (viral resistance, cellular resistance, toxicity) could be called rational sequencing. Choice of therapy should never involve compromise in terms of activity. However, the choice of drug should also be guided by tolerability profiles and considerations of coverage of the widest range of infected cells, compartmental penetration, pharmacokinetic interactions and, importantly, the ability of an agent or combination to limit future therapeutic options through selection of cross-resistant virus. Available clinical end-point data clearly indicate that combination therapy is superior to monotherapy, with clinical and surrogate marker data supporting the use of triple drug (or double protease inhibitor) combinations over double nucleoside analogue combinations. Thus, 3-drug therapy should represent current standard practice in a nontrials setting. Treatment should be considered as early as practical, and may be best guided by measurement of viral load, with a range of other markers having potential utility in individualising treatment decisions. Therapeutic failure may be defined clinically, immunologically or, ideally, virologically, and should prompt substitution of at least 2, and preferably all, components of the treatment regimen. Drug intolerance may also be best managed by rational substitution.