The role of P glycoprotein (P-gp) in kidney is now being explored, and under physiological conditions, this protein is thought to be an excretory pump of cationic xenobiotics and metabolites. Functionally, two different types of P-gp have been described, but only the class I has been related to drug transport, and its overexpression confers the multidrug resistance phenotype in tumoral cells. It has been proposed that P-gp is involved in the energy-dependent transport of substrates through the cell membrane (toxic metabolites, toxins, nutrients, ions, peptides, etc.)--like a 'hydrophobic molecule vacuum cleaner'. Several physiological functions have been attributed to P-gp: defense against xenobiotic aggression and transmembrane transport of prenylcysteine methyl esters, removing these cytotoxic metabolites from cells. A variety of substrates ranging from chemotherapeutics to steroid hormones, antibiotics, and calcium channel blockers can be transported by P-gp, suggesting the possible involvement of this protein in other unknown functions. Results from our group and others have suggested that overexpression of P-gp in renal tubular and mesangial cells prevents pharmacological nephrotoxicity by cyclosporin A (CsA). On the other hand CsA, a substrate of the pump, could act as a blocker in tubular cells by competitive inhibition. One relevant aspect in kidney is the possible relationship between P-gp and protein kinase C. Several reports suggest that protein kinase C may play a role in inducing the P-gp overexpression in cells under xenobiotic pressure, through activation of the ras oncoprotein family. This could be mediated directly by angiotensin II as a ras activator. This way, the detoxicant function of P-gp against products of the ras catabolism could mediate their accumulation when the 'vacuum cleaner' function is blocked by CsA or tacrolimus, contributing to the initial development of fibroblastic activation that leads to interstitial fibrosis associated with nephrotoxicity by these immunosuppressor drugs. In conclusion, P-gp expression could be an important component of a complex detoxifying system in kidney against xenobiotics or regulating the traffic of endogenous metabolites responsible for the susceptibility of subjects to the development of nephrotoxicity against different drugs.