Amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin), as a combination of two active agents, poses extra challenges over single agents in establishing clinically relevant breakpoints for in vitro susceptibility tests. Hence, reported differences in amoxicillin-clavulanate percent susceptibilities among Escherichia coli isolates may reflect localized resistance problems and/or methodological differences in susceptibility testing and breakpoint criteria. The objectives of the present study were to determine the effects of (i) methodology, e.g., those of the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) and the Deutsche Industrie Norm-Medizinische Mikrobiologie (DIN), (ii) country of origin (Spain, France, and Germany), and (iii) site of infection (urinary tract, intra-abdominal sepsis, or other site[s]) upon the incidence of susceptibility to amoxicillin-clavulanate in 185 clinical isolates of E. coli. Cefuroxime and cefotaxime were included for comparison. The use of NCCLS methodology resulted in different distribution of amoxicillin-clavulanate MICs than that obtained with the DIN methodology, a difference highlighted by the 10% more strains found to be within the 8- to 32-microg/ml MIC range. This difference reflects the differing amounts of clavulanic acid present. NCCLS and DIN methodologies also produce different MIC distributions for cefotaxime but not for cefuroxime. Implementation of NCCLS and DIN breakpoints produced markedly different incidences of strains that were found to be susceptible, intermediate or resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanate. A total of 86.5% strains were found to be susceptible to amoxicillin-clavulanate by the NCCLS methodology, whereas only 43.8% were found to be susceptible by the DIN methodology. Similarly, 4.3% of the strains were found to be resistant by NCCLS guidelines compared to 21.1% by the DIN guidelines. The use of DIN breakpoints resulted in a fivefold-higher incidence of strains categorized as resistant to cefuroxime. There were no marked differences due to country of origin upon the MIC distributions for amoxicillin-clavulanate, cefuroxime, or cefotaxime, as determined with the NCCLS guidelines. Isolates from urinary tract and intra-abdominal infections were generally more resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanate than were isolates from other sites of infection.