Since the establishment of bacteria-laden plaque as a causative agent in gingivitis, the search for specific bacteria that induce different types of periodontitis has generated extensive research. In contrast to many other microbial-induced disorders, the specific periodontal pathogen(s) has not been identified to date. Therefore, the search for an effective systemic agent to prevent the loss of attachment through the selective reduction of known periodontal pathogens has remained elusive. It is not surprising then that antibiotics are not used solely to manage periodontal diseases but rather as an adjunct to the mechanical debridement of root surfaces in select periodontal diseases. Further, the sole use of antibiotics in patients with adult periodontitis (or those who exhibit signs of inflammation but are periodontally stable) has shown little benefit and only increases the chance of microbial resistance to antibiotics. Despite these limitations, considerable progress in antibiotic therapy has delivered regimens that enhance the effectiveness of conventional therapy. In contrast to traditional antimicrobial therapy, new treatment modalities have begun to focus on modulating the responses of host cells to bacteria rather than modulating only the bacteria. Current drugs used to regulate host cells inhibit the cyclooxygenase pathway, reduce the activity of metalloproteinases, or inactivate bone resorptive cells (see Table 1). Although these drugs offer great potential to modulate a variety of mammalian cells, a notable and consequential limitation of these agents is a lack of specificity. Inflammation, bone metabolism, and connective tissue metabolism are two-edged swords; all are necessary for the homeostasis of the tissue, but some or all may also be involved in the pathologic destruction of that same tissue. Hence, drugs that inhibit destruction of the connective tissue in one site of the periodontium also interfere with wound healing at another. As a result of these limitations, the efficacy, safety, and cost-effectiveness of the long-term use of these agents is unknown. Preliminary results of treatment with these drugs are promising, and future generations of host-modulating drugs will provide clinicians with additional agents to help improve the success rate of periodontal treatment for patients. Antibiotics remain an important adjunctive therapy in the treatment of periodontal diseases, and the use of host modulating drugs as supplemental agents in the management of periodontal diseases continues to grow. As more knowledge is gained about the causes of periodontal diseases, new drugs that are potent, effective, site specific, and safe can be delivered at optimal times by simply having the patient take a few tablets. Considering the dramatic progress in the past decade in understanding the cause and pharmacologic management of periodontal diseases, the twenty-first century holds great promise for the development of magic bullets.