The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of different infection levels of Ostertagia ostertagi and Cooperia oncophora in a simulated 'first grazing season' on the resistance of calves to an artificial challenge infection. The infection levels were determined by the infection schedules and the chemoprophylaxis used. Thirty six 7-11-month old Holstein-Friesian bull calves were randomly divided into four groups. The animals of group B received an ivermectin sustained release bolus (ISRB) on day 0. The calves of group D were treated on days 0 and 56 with a subcutaneous injection of doramectin (0.2 mg kg(-1) BW). Group C was the untreated control group. The calves of group N were used as helminth-naive controls, while the animals of groups B, C and D were trickle infected for 24 weeks. The infection schedules were designed to simulate the expected infection pattern for each treatment group under set-stocked conditions in temperate climate areas. After the last infection, all animals were treated with oxfendazole. One week later, all animals received a challenge infection of 50,000 O. ostertagi L3 and 100,000 C. oncophora L3, spread over 10 consecutive days. During the primary infection period the faecal egg output and the serum pepsinogen and antibody levels reflected the different levels of host-parasite contact between the groups (group C > group D > group B > group N). After the challenge infection, faecal egg counts, total Ostertagia burden, size of the adult worms and abomasal globule leucocyte counts all indicated a positive relationship between the level of Ostertagia infection during the primary infection period and the level of acquired resistance. A reduction of host-parasite contact during the primary infection period, as a consequence of the infection schedule and the chemoprophylaxis used, resulted in a diminished level of resistance to the artificial challenge infection with O. ostertagi. Faecal cultures and small intestine worm counts indicated that all previously infected groups had acquired a high degree of resistance to the Cooperia challenge infection.