The objective of this study was to investigate the influence of different types of chemoprophylaxis in first season grazing calves on their resistance against a natural reinfection with Ostertagia ostertagi and Cooperia oncophora in the second grazing season. Thirty helminth-naive crossbred calves were randomly divided in three groups of 10 animals. The animals of group B received an ivermectin sustained release bolus on day 0. The calves of group D were treated on days 0 and 56 with a subcutaneous injection of doramectin (0.2 mg kg(-1) BW). Group C was the untreated control group ('immune' controls). Although exposure to gastrointestinal nematodes in the first grazing season was only limited, the chemoprophylactic treatments in groups B and D resulted in three distinctly different infection levels (group C > group D > group B). At the start of the second grazing season, six helminth-naive steers (group N, 'susceptible' controls) were turned out together with the second season animals. After 3 weeks of grazing, the 'susceptible' controls were slaughtered, together with four animals from each other group. Parasitological and immunological parameters indicated that resistance to reinfection with Ostertagia was reduced in the chemoprophylactic treated animals, and was negatively related to the degree of suppression of host-parasite contact in the first grazing season (group C > group D > group B > group N). None of the groups had developed a complete resistance against Cooperia yet. A negative relationship was observed between reduction of first grazing season exposure, and weight gains early in the second grazing season. The remaining animals stayed on pasture until the beginning of November. At the end of the second grazing season, levels of acquired resistance against Ostertagia infection were similar in all groups, and all animals had become immune against Cooperia. No effect of first year chemoprophylaxis on total weight gains could be demonstrated. Because of discrepancy between pasture larval counts and tracer worm counts, it was not possible to draw firm conclusions on the effect of chemoprophylaxis on pasture infestation levels in the second year.