H3N2 human influenza viruses that are resistant to horse, pig, or rabbit serum possess unique amino acid mutations in their hemagglutinin (HA) protein. To determine the molecular mechanisms of this resistance, we characterized the receptor-binding properties of these mutants by measuring their affinity for total serum protein inhibitors and for soluble receptor analogs. Pig serum-resistant variants displayed a markedly decreased affinity for total pig serum sialylglycoproteins (which contain predominantly 2-6 linkage between sialic acid and galactose residues) and for the sialyloligosaccharide 6'-sialyl(N-acetyllactosamine). These properties correlated with the substitution 186S-->I in HA1. The major inhibitory activity in rabbit serum was found to be a beta inhibitor with characteristics of mannose-binding lectins. Rabbit serum-resistant variants exhibited decreased sensitivity to this inhibitor due to the loss of a glycosylation sequon at positions 246 to 248 of the HA. In addition to a somewhat reduced affinity for 6'-sialyl(N-acetyllactosamine)-containing receptors, horse serum-resistant variants lost the ability to bind the viral neuraminidase-resistant 4-O-acetylated sialic acid moieties of equine alpha2-macroglobulin because of the mutation 145N-->K/D in their HA1. These results indicate that influenza viruses become resistant to serum inhibitors because their affinity for these inhibitors is reduced. To determine whether natural inhibitors play a role in viral evolution during interspecies transmission, we compared the receptor-binding properties of H3N8 avian and equine viruses, including two strains isolated during the 1989 to 1990 equine influenza outbreak, which was caused by an avian virus in China. Avian strains bound 4-O-acetylated sialic acid residues of equine alpha2-macroglobulin, whereas equine strains did not. The earliest avian-like isolate from a horse influenza outbreak bound to this sialic acid with an affinity similar to that of avian viruses; a later isolate, however, displayed binding properties more similar to those of classical equine strains. These data suggest that the neuraminidase-resistant sialylglycoconjugates present in horses exert selective pressure on the receptor-binding properties of avian virus HA after its introduction into this host.