Abnormal modulation of the immune system is a prerequisite for the expression of Graves' disease. Thus, when hyperthyroidism developed in a renal transplant recipient under long term immunosuppression with cyclosporine A and prednisone, we carefully evaluated the basis for her hyperthyroidism and her state of immunosuppression. Immunosuppression was confirmed by finding markedly deficient lymphocyte responses to common mitogens. Lymphocyte phenotype frequencies were those previously found in Graves', i.e. elevated frequencies of CD3/DR, CD5/26, and CD3/25 lymphocytes. There was also reversal of the CD4/CD8 ratio due to increased CD8 frequency; this is not a typical finding in autoimmune hyperthyroidism, but has been seen in the intrathyroidal lymphocyte populations of some Graves' patients and is associated with other forms of autoimmunity. The patient's serum contained a broad spectrum of TSH receptor autoantibodies (TSHRAbs) characteristic of Graves' disease. To determine whether these were an unusual population of autoantibodies, we determined their functional epitopes before and for nearly 1 yr after radioiodine therapy. Stimulating TSHRAbs that increase cAMP levels were human receptor (TSHR) specific and consistently recognized functional epitopes located on TSHR residues 90-165. Stimulating TSHRAbs that increased arachidonate release and inositol phosphate levels recognized residues 25-90, as did TSH binding inhibitory Igs present in the patient. These data demonstrate that Graves' disease with a wide array of TSHRAbs can develop in a patient despite adequate immunosuppression. More importantly, they show that the cAMP-stimulating TSHRAb associated with disease expression in this patient had a homogeneous subtype dependent on TSHR residues 90-165. As persistence of this type of TSHRAb over time has been associated with resistance to methimazole therapy in Graves' patients, we speculate that the development and persistence of TSHRAb with this homogeneous epitope may be linked to resistance to immunosuppressive therapy.