UNLABELLED: Nelfinavir is a selective inhibitor of HIV protease, the enzyme responsible for post-translational processing of HIV propeptides. In the presence of the drug, immature, noninfectious virus particles are produced. Nelfinavir in combination with nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and/or other protease inhibitors profoundly suppresses viral replication. Plasma HIV RNA levels (viral loan) rapidly fall below the limit of detection (LOD; usually 400 or 500 copies/ml in the majority of patients. When used in combination with NRTIs, nelfinavir 1250mg twice daily produced similar results to 3-times-daily nelfinavir at a range of total daily dosages. In an ongoing study > 70% of adults receiving a nelfinavir based combination regimen had plasma HIV RNA levels below the LOD (< 400 copies/ml) after 84 weeks. In addition, 73% of paediatric patients receiving nelfinavir plus at least 1 new NRTI had viral loads below the LOD (< 400 copies/ml) after 34 weeks. Furthermore, CD4+ cell counts generally increased in conjunction with reductions in viral load. Combination therapy with nelfinavir and saquinavir results in higher saquinavir plasma concentrations, make twice-daily administration of saquinavir feasible and may delay the emergence of resistant viral strains. A unique mutation at codon 30 (D30N) of the protease gene confers resistance to nelfinavir, but HIV with D30N mutation remains fully susceptible to indinavir, ritonavir and saquinavir in vitro. Nonetheless, in clinical use, significant cross-resistance is seen with all currently available protease inhibitors. Diarrhoea is the most frequently reported adverse event in patients receiving nelfinavir-based combination therapy and has been reported in up to 32% of nelfinavir recipients in randomised trials. Diarrhoea is generally of mild to moderate severity and does not result in weight loss. Rash, nausea, headache and asthenia were each reported in < or = 5% of patients. Approximately 5% of patients enrolled in an expanded access programme in the US discontinued nelfinavir because of adverse events. Nelfinavir is metabolised by the cytochrome P450 system. Several clinically significant pharmacokinetic drug interactions between nelfinavir and other drugs (i.e. ketoconazole, rifabutin, rifabutin, rifampicin), including other protease inhibitors (i.e. indinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir) have been documented. As with other available protease inhibitors, hyperglycaemia, hyperlipidaemia and abnormal fat distribution have been reported, albeit infrequently, in association with nelfinavir. CONCLUSION: Nelfinavir-based combination regimens are well tolerated and produce profound and prolonged suppression of HIV replication in adult and paediatric patients. Hence, nelfinavir is suitable for inclusion in antiretroviral regimens for initial therapy for HIV infection and, alternatively, in regimens for patients unable to tolerate other protease inhibitors.