PURPOSE: To review the activity of the purine analogues fludarabine, cladribine (2-chlorodeoxyadenosine [2-CdA]), and pentostatin (2'-deoxycoformycin) in the treatment of indolent lymphoid malignancies, including chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, and indolent non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with previously untreated, relapsed, or refractory indolent NHL and other indolent lymphoid malignancies who have been treated with purine analogues. RESULTS: Purine analogues have revolutionized the treatment of indolent lymphomas. Fludarabine induces responses in almost 50% of patients with relapsed or refractory indolent NHL and produces complete remissions (CRs) in 10% to 15% of patients. In patients receiving fludarabine as initial treatment, CRs are achieved in almost 40%, with an overall response rate of 70% and a median time to progression > 1 year. Response rates with 2-CdA in previously treated patients appear similar to those with fludarabine, although less durable. Fludarabine and 2-CdA achieve a higher number of durable responses in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia than are generally achieved with alkylating agents in this disease. Pentostatin appears to be less active in NHL. Newer purine analogues currently in clinical trials in lymphomas include gemcitabine and compound 506U. Promising activity has been reported with the combination of fludarabine, mitoxantrone, dexamethasone, and fludarabine plus cyclophosphamide. Combinations of 2-CdA with other agents are also in development. Toxicities associated with these purine analogues primarily include moderate myelosuppression, profound immunosuppression, neurotoxicity at higher than recommended doses, and a possible increase in secondary malignancies. CONCLUSION: The purine analogues should provide the basis for new treatment strategies with the goal of curing patients with indolent NHL. For progress to continue, patients must be referred to important and innovative clinical research trials.