Cultured MDCK cell monolayers respond to a low level of extracellular calcium ([Ca2+]e < or = 5 microM) with a loss of transepithelial electrical resistance and transport function, and changes in position of a circumferential ring of actin filaments tethered to the plasma membrane at the zonula adhaerens. Keeping this cytoskeletal structure in place seems necessary to preserve the architecture of the tight junctions and therefore their sealing capacity. All three effects are reversible upon restituting normal [Ca2+]e. Recent work provided evidence of actin-myosin interactions at the filament ring, thus suggesting a contraction process involved in the alteration of the actin cytoskeleton. We now report that active contraction does occur and causes an extensive morphological transformation of MDCK cells. A marked increase in cell height simultaneous with a decrease in width and area of contact to the substratum was seen within 10 min of removal of [Ca2+]e; recovery began immediately after replacing calcium, although it took longer for completion. Conventional and confocal epifluorescence studies showed actin colocalized with myosin II at various planes of resting or contracted cells, in particular at the ring level. Electron-micrographs revealed the circumferential actin ring associated with the plasma membrane in a waist-like constriction where Ca2+ was removed from the cultures. Contraction, as well as relaxation, in response to [Ca2+]e variations were inhibited by cytochalasin-D (an actin-filament disrupting drug), by okadaic acid( an inhibitor of myosin light-chain dephosphorylation), and by 2,3-butanedione monoxime (a blocker of myosin II ATPase activity). Similarly, no response was observed in cells previously depleted of metabolic energy by 2,4-dinitrophenol and 2-deoxy-D-glucose preincubation. The actin-myosin mediated reversible structural transformation of MDCK cells in response to [Ca2+]3 poses new questions for the interpretation of in vitro experiments, as well as for the understanding of epithelial function.