Immediate repair of the gastrointestinal epithelium after superficial injury is called restitution. It is based on the migration of the surviving mucoid neck cells over the area of injury. The involvement of growth factors in the process has been recently documented. They are known to enhance the process (ie, EGF, FGF, TGF-beta) and to activate the basolateral Na+-H+-antiport (EGF). They may exert their effect by activating intracellular tyrosine kinases or by inducing chemotaxis. Yet, their precise mechanism of action in the process is unknown. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of modulation of the signal transduction pathway on the occurrence of proliferative mucoid neck and foveolar cells in guinea pig gastric epithelium. Therefore guinea pig gastric epithelium was mounted in Ussing chambers in vitro and perfused 4 hr after superficial injury with 1.25 M NaCl. The potential difference over the epithelium and tissue resistance were recorded simultaneously. The tissue was exposed either to cycloheximide, genistein, or to 4-phorbol myristate 13-acetate (PMA) during the 4-hr recovery, and the expression of proliferative cells was assessed by staining the tissue for proliferative cells (Ki-67). The mean proliferative index of tissues subjected to NaCl injury was significantly higher than that of uninjured control tissues after 4 hr of restitution. Inhibition of the signaling pathway with genistein decreased the proliferative index significantly, while its stimulation with phorbol myristate increased it. Both electrophysiologic and morphologic restitution were sensitive to genistein, but not to PMA or cycloheximide. Superficial epithelial injury results in a significantly increased occurrence of proliferative cells in isolated guinea pig gastric epithelium. This endogenous activation of the tissue is sensitive to inhibition by tyrosine kinases and to stimulation by protein kinases. Electrophysiologic and morphologic recovery are also affected by the modulation of the signaling pathway. This suggests that it is involved in the immediate repair process.