Topical anesthetics are commonly used in the evaluation of nasal pathology. The anesthetics routinely used, 4% lidocaine with phenylephrine, or 4% cocaine, have been demonstrated to have varying inhibitory effects on bacterial cultures. The present study examined the antimicrobial activity of these topical anesthetics used in nasal procedures. The pathogens used were Branhamella catarrhalis, Enterobacter sp., Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Organisms were against two-fold serial dilutions of stock preparations of 4% lidocaine with 0.25% phenylephrine, 0.25% phenylephrine, 0.1% methylparaben, 250 mg/ml ampicillin, and 4% cocaine. The minimum inhibitory concentration and minimum bactericidal concentration for each of the solutions were obtained. The bacteria studied varied gently in their susceptibility to lidocaine with phenylephrine versus cocaine: Cocaine consistently exhibited greater antimicrobial activity than lidocaine. Phenylephrine and methylparaben showed slight antimicrobial activity. These topical anesthetics have slight bactericidal activity against nasal pathogens, which can sometimes lead to false-negative results. Otolaryngologists should recognize the possible antimicrobial effects of topical anesthetics when culturing specimens. This is especially important when the specimen will be used for guidance of antimicrobial therapy, as in the case of the critically ill patient who requires aspiration for organism-specific therapy. Further studies, specifically in vivo experiments, are needed to determine if use of the drugs produces a significant change in the ability to culture organisms from these sites. This type of study would, however, be difficult to perform, since most patients requiring aspiration are already on high-dose antibiotics that would inhibit the growth of most microorganisms. A modified aspiration technique using a less concentrated topical anesthetic will likely be required to increase the chances of obtaining positive cultures.