The induction of local T helper type 1 (Th1)-mediated cellular immunity is crucial for resistance of mice to genital infection by the obligate intracellular bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis. We tested the hypothesis that the route of immunization that elicits relatively high numbers of chlamydia-specific, gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-secreting T lymphocytes (ISTLs) in the genital tract would induce optimal protective immunity against reinfection. Female BALB/c mice were infected intravaginally (i.v.), intranasally (i.n.), orally (p.o.), or subcutaneously (s.c.) with C. trachomatis. At days 7, 14, 21, and 28 postinfection, T cells isolated from the genital tract tissues were restimulated with chlamydial antigen in vitro, and the amounts of IFN-gamma induced were measured by a sandwiched enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method. At day 7 postinfection, i.n.- and i.v.-immunized mice had high levels of chlamydia-specific ISTLs in their genital tracts (203.58 +/- 68.1 and 225.5 +/- 12.1 pg/ml, respectively). However, there were no detectable ISTLs in the genital tracts of p.o.- or s.c.-infected mice. When preinfected mice were challenged i.v. 70 days later, animals preexposed by the i.n. route were highly resistant to reinfection, with greatly reduced chlamydial burden, and suffered an attenuated infection that resolved by day 6 postchallenge. Animals preexposed by the i.v. route were modestly protected, whereas p.o. and s.c. groups were indistinguishable in this regard from control mice. The resistance of i.n.-immunized mice (and to some extent the i.v.-exposed mice) to reinfection was associated with early appearance (within 24 h) of high levels of genital ISTLs compared with mice preinfected by other routes. Furthermore, although i.n. and i.v.-immunized mice had comparable levels of chlamydia-specific immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies in their vaginal washes, the levels of IgG2a were four- sixfold higher in i.n.-immunized mice than in any of the other groups. The results suggested that immunization routes that foster rapid induction of vigorous genital mucosal cell-mediated immune (CMI) effectors (e.g., IFN-gamma), the CMI-associated humoral effector, IgG2a, and to some extent secretory IgA produce protective immunity against chlamydial genital infection. Therefore, i.n. immunization is a potential delivery route of choice in the development of a vaccine against Chlamydia.