Antibiotics are among the most commonly prescribed drugs in paediatrics. Because of an overall rise in health care costs, lack of uniformity in drug prescribing and the emergence of antibiotic resistance, monitoring and control of antibiotic use is of growing concern and strict antibiotic policies are warranted. Before such policies can be implemented, detailed knowledge of antibiotic prescribing patterns is important. In this combined retrospective and prospective study the utilisation of antibiotics in a paediatric university hospital over three consecutive years has been analysed. Over an 8-week period (1 November-22 December) in 1994, 1995 and 1996 patient charts were reviewed with regard to antibiotic prescription (generic class, dose, duration and indication). A total of 1120 patients were admitted during the study periods. Antibiotics were prescribed at least once for 36% of hospitalised children, although only 12.3% of the patients receiving antibiotics had a proven bacterial infection. During a single hospitalisation 13, 4.7, 2.6, and 2.7% of all children received 2, 3, 4 or more than four antibiotics, respectively. Infants less than 2 years received antibiotics more frequently than older children (25 and 11% respectively, P=0.0256). More children admitted to the intensive care unit received antibiotics compared with patients admitted on medium care units (49.7 and 29.3% respectively, P < 0.0001). They received more often several different antibiotic courses (2.6 courses per patient versus 1.9 courses per patient, P < 0.0001). These children were also given more often intravenous rather than oral antibiotics (P < 0.0001) Significant differences could be found between the generic classes of antibiotics prescribed to children admitted to the intensive care unit and the medium care. However high variability in dose and duration of antibiotic therapy for the same clinical indication was shown. A high percentage of all hospitalised children receive antibiotics. In most cases antibiotics are started on an empirical basis, without proof of a bacterial infection, either before the start of therapy or afterwards. The fact that children admitted to intensive care units and patients of younger age groups are at special risk of receiving multiple courses of antibiotics, together with the knowledge that antibiotic resistance develops in this setting, suggest that strategies to control antibiotic use should focus on these patient populations.