BACKGROUND: The emergence of a ganciclovir (GCV)-resistant human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) strain in a heart transplant recipient (HTR) coinfected by multiple HCMV strains was investigated. METHODS: A HTR with primary HCMV infection was treated with three induction courses of intravenous GCV followed by a 2-month maintenance treatment with oral GCV. HCMV antigenemia, viremia, and leukoDNAemia levels were monitored. GCV susceptibility was analyzed by an immediate-early antigen plaque reduction assay and by a rapid screening assay performed using peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) as viral inoculum. The viral population in blood was investigated by restriction analysis of multiple genome regions. UL97 and UL54 genes were sequenced in parallel in both HCMV isolates and the relevant PBL samples. A rapid molecular assay for detection and quantitation of the GCV-resistant mutant was developed. RESULTS: The emergence of a GCV-resistant UL97 mutant (Cys-607 --> Tyr) was responsible for treatment failure during oral GCV therapy. The genetic analysis of the HCMV population showed the sequential appearance in blood of two unrelated strains (referred to as A and B). Strain A most likely derived from the transplanted organ and strain B from a subsequent blood transfusion. The resistant variant (Br) emerged from strain B and became predominant "in vivo" under the GCV pressure. However, after foscarnet administration, the resistant mutant disappeared in viral isolates, whereas it was still present as a minor proportion in PBL samples. CONCLUSION: (a) Oral GCV may select resistant strains in transplanted patients; (b) results of the rapid screening assay were clinically useful for shifting to an alternative treatment, thus avoiding the appearance of HCMV disease; (c) virus isolation may not be the most reliable approach to detection of HCMV drug-resistant strains; (d) a novel molecular assay for rapid detection of UL97 Cys-607 --> Tyr mutation directly in clinical specimens was developed, allowing earlier "in vivo" detection of the resistant mutant.