Loss of wild-type p53 activity is one of the most common molecular abnormalities in human cancers including malignant gliomas. The p53 status is also thought to modulate sensitivity to irradiation and chemotherapy. Here, we studied the effect of a p53 gene transfer on the chemosensitivity of three human glioma cell lines with different endogenous p53 status (LN-229, wild-type; LN-18, mutant; LN-308, deleted), using the murine temperature-sensitive p53 val135 mutant. Expression of mutant p53 enhanced proliferation of LN-308 cells but reduced proliferation in the other cell lines. Expression of wild-type p53 caused reversible growth arrest of all cell lines but failed to induce apoptosis. Growth arrest induced by wild-type p53 was associated with strong induction of p21 expression. Strong induction of BAX expression and loss of BCL-2 expression, which are associated with p53-dependent apoptosis rather than growth arrest, were not observed. Wild-type p53 failed to sensitize glioma cells to cytotoxic drugs including BCNU, cytarabine, doxorubicin, teniposide and vincristine. The combined effects of wild-type p53 gene transfer and drug treatment were less than additive rather than synergistic, suggesting that the intracellular cascades activated by p53 and chemotherapy are redundant. Unexpectedly, forced expression of mutant p53 modulated drug sensitivity in that it enhanced the toxicity of some drugs but attenuated the effects of others. These effects may represent a dominant negative effect of mutant p53 in LN-229 cells which have wild-type p53 activity but must be considered a gain of function-type effect in the other two cell lines which have no wild-type p53 activity. Importantly, no clear-cut pattern emerged among the three cell lines studied. We conclude that somatic gene therapy based on the reintroduction of p53 will limit the proliferation of human malignant glioma cells but is unlikely to induce clinically relevant sensitization to chemotherapy in these tumors.