We investigated whether S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe), dilinoleoylphosphatidylcholine (DLPC), or SAMe + DLPC influence liver lipid composition as well as acute ethanol hepatotoxicity in the isolated perfused rat liver (IPRL). SAMe (25 mg/kg intramuscularly three times a day) was administered for five consecutive days, while DLPC was administered intraperitoneally for five days. The liver was then isolated, perfused with taurocholate to stabilize bile secretion, and exposed to 0.5% ethanol for 70 min. SAMe, without changing total phospholipid (PL) content, induced an increase in the phosphatidylcholine/phosphatidylethanolamine (PC/PE) molar ratio in both liver homogenate and microsomes and a significant enrichment of 16:0-20:4 and 18:0-20:4 PC molecular species. DLPC induced a significant enrichment of PL in liver homogenate and microsomes due to a contemporary increase in PC and PE. The PC enrichment specifically involved 16:0-20:4 and 18:0-20:4 PC molecular species besides the HPLC peak containing the administered 18:2-18:2 PC species. DLPC + SAMe increased the concentration of PC in liver homogenate and microsomes due to a specific enrichment of 16:0-22:6, 16:0-20:4, and 18:0-20:4 PC molecular species, and the HPLC peak containing the administered 18:2-18:2 PC species. Ethanol acute exposure in the control IPRLs for 70 min induced a depletion of cholesterol in both liver homogenate and microsomes without significant changes in the composition of PL classes and PC molecular species. SAMe, DLPC, or SAMe + DLPC counteracted the cholesterol depletion induced by ethanol, indicating that phospholipid changes promoted by these treatments all induce a major resistance of liver membranes to the effect of ethanol. Ethanol administration in control IPRLs induced a fivefold increase of AST and LDH release in the perfusate, depletion of glutathione in homogenates and mitochondria, decreased oxygen liver consumption, and inhibition of bile flow. These effects of ethanol were significantly antagonized by SAMe. In contrast, DLPC alone only minimally attenuated enzyme release in the perfusate and the inhibitory effect of ethanol on bile flow, but it failed to influence the depletion of total and mitochondrial glutathione or the depressed oxygen consumption induced by ethanol. DLPC, administered together with SAMe, added nothing to the protective effect of SAMe against ethanol hepatotoxicity and cholestasis. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that both SAMe and DLPC induced marked modifications in the lipid composition of liver membranes with a similar enrichment of polyunsaturated PC molecular species. Only SAMe, however, significantly protected against the hepatotoxic and cholestatic effect of acute ethanol administration, an effect associated with maintained normal glutathione mitochondrial levels and oxygen liver consumption. This indicates that the protective effect of SAMe against ethanol toxicity is linked to multiple mechanisms, the maintenance of glutathione levels probably being one of the most important.