BACKGROUND: The use of protease inhibitors in the treatment of HIV-1 infection is associated with the new onset of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidaemia and lipodystrophy. It is unclear whether these findings are coincidental or whether they reflect a causative effect of protease inhibitors. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of treatment with protease inhibitors on insulin sensitivity, oral glucose tolerance and serum lipids in HIV-infected patients in order to determine whether treatment with protease inhibitors can cause peripheral insulin resistance. DESIGN: Cross-sectional controlled study in HIV-infected patients treated with protease inhibitors to assess insulin sensitivity, oral glucose tolerance and changes in serum lipids. METHODS: Sixty-seven patients treated with protease inhibitors, 13 therapy-naive patients and 18 HIV-negative control subjects were tested for insulin sensitivity (intravenous insulin tolerance test). In a subgroup of 24 treated patients, oral glucose tolerance was determined. Serum lipids prior to and under treatment with protease inhibitors were compared. RESULTS: Patients on protease inhibitors had a significantly decreased insulin sensitivity when compared with therapy-naive patients (median, 75 and 156 micromol/l/min, respectively; P < 0.001). All treated patients with impaired (n=4) or diabetic (n=9) oral glucose tolerance, and four out of 11 patients with normal glucose tolerance showed peripheral insulin resistance; all therapy-naive patients had normal insulin sensitivity. Treatment with protease inhibitors led to a significant increase in total triglycerides and cholesterol in the 67 treated patients (median increase, 113 and 37 mg/ml, respectively). CONCLUSION: Treatment with protease inhibitors is associated with peripheral insulin resistance, leading to impaired or diabetic oral glucose tolerance in some of the patients, and with hyperlipidaemia. Overall, there is a large variation in the severity and clinical presentation of protease inhibitor-associated metabolic side-effects.