Clinical studies of agents capable of reversing P-glycoprotein (Pgp)-mediated multidrug resistance have attracted much attention in recent years. One question of interest in such studies is whether the concentrations achieved by chemosensitizers are sufficient to inhibit Pgp function. The goal of the present study was to develop a reliable ex vivo bioassay for analysis of the Pgp-inhibiting activity of chemosensitizer-containing patient serum. The fluorescent Pgp substrates daunorubicin (DNR) and rhodamine 123 (R123) were used as probes for Pgp function. The 8226/DOX6 human myeloma cell line, which expresses Pgp at levels that can be detected in clinical cancers, was used as a model system. The index chemosensitizers tested were dexverapamil (DVPM) and cyclosporin A, with particular focus on DVPM. Using flow cytometry, chemosensitizer effects on 1-h drug accumulation and on drug retention at 30 min were evaluated. In the studies using pooled human serum spiked in vitro with graded chemosensitizer concentrations, the order of assay sensitivity was R123 retention >>> R123 accumulation > DNR retention equal to DNR accumulation. Keeping serum spiked with DVPM for several hours at room temperature or 4 degreesC or for several months at -80 degreesC had no effect on Pgp-blocking activity. Sixteen blood samples from patients with metastatic breast cancer receiving DVPM to overcome epirubicin resistance were analyzed for Pgp-inhibiting activity and for levels of DVPM and nor-DVPM, the major metabolite of verapamil. Each patient sample was found capable of increasing R123 retention in the 8226/DOX6 cells, with activity factors of 3- to 8-fold and good agreement between DVPM blood levels and bioassay activity (r = 0.7168; two-sided P = 0.0018). The R123 retention assay developed and validated in this study seems to be a sensitive, reproducible, and easy-to-use method for analysis of Pgp-inhibiting activity of chemosensitizer-containing human serum. The assay seems capable of estimating DVPM blood levels and could prove to be a valuable tool for monitoring chemosensitizer treatment in cancer patients.