In France the current consensus for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia is based on the French Society for Infectious Diseases 1991 guidelines. In healthy adults without signs of severe disease, oral amoxicillin is recommended at the dose of 3 g per day for 8 to 10 days. This empirical choice is warranted by the prevalence of pneumococcal infections, found as causal agents in half to two-thirds of the bacteriologically proven cases. The 3 g dose is recommended due to the increasing risk of penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae with MIC > 1 microgram/ml and exceptionally > 2 micrograms/ml. Clinical experience has shown that with a threshold at 2 micrograms/ml, 3 g of amoxicillin is a safe and sure choice. The duration is undoubtedly too long for most patients, but is a prudent measure due to the lack of clinical signs distinguishing between patent infection and its prolongation by inflammatory processes. Indiscriminate prescription of amoxicillin alone is however unacceptable as aminopenicillin is not effective against all microbial agents responsible for community-acquired pneumonia. The risk of selecting resistant strains is very real. Use of a large spectrum antibiotic could be indicated as first line treatment in patients with risk factors (underlying chronic disease, institutionalization, exposure to Gram negatives or S. aureus). For such patients, combination with a beta-lactamase inhibitor (coamoxiclav) or a cephalosporin with a MIC similar to that for penicillin G (cefpodoxime proxetil, cefuroxime axetil) could be recommended. In case of severe disease, Legionella pneumophila must be taken into consideration, implicating adjuction of a macrolide. Wide spectrum fluoroquinolones such as the soon to be available trovafloxacin offer a safe alternative, covering the main microorganisms responsible for community acquired pneumonia. Widespread use would however increase the risk of microbial resistance. In the current epidemiological situation in France, prescription of an aminopenicillin alone for alveolar community-acquired pneumonia in healthy adults remains the gold standard for first line therapy.