Drug-resistant human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 has been detected in patients on all of the currently available antiretroviral drug regimens. Continuous, high-level virus replication with an error-prone reverse transcriptase enzyme and potential viral recombination events lead to each patient having numerous viral quasispecies and promote the emergence of drug-resistant strains. Drug resistance is associated with one or more point mutations in the HIV gene of the protein that is targeted by the drug. Factors associated with rapid emergence of drug resistance include host factors, such as advanced HIV disease and low CD4 cell counts; viral factors, such as high plasma HIV RNA, pre-existing drug-resistant virus, and possibly syncytium-inducing (SI) phenotype; and drug-related factors, such as suboptimal drug levels or poor compliance. High-level drug resistance has emerged after weeks to months of therapy for lamivudine (3TC) and nevirapine where drug-resistant quasispecies pre-exist in essentially all patients. Resistance has emerged more slowly for zidovudine (ZDV) and HIV protease inhibitors, which require the sequential accumulation of multiple mutations to develop high-level resistance. Certain drugs, such as didanosine (DDI), dideoxycytidine (DDC), and stavudine (D4T) have only produced viruses with low-level resistance, despite prolonged therapy. Development of drug-resistant HIV-1 has been associated with declining CD4 cell counts and rising plasma viral load. Zidovudine-resistant HIV-1 has been associated with adverse clinical outcomes independent of baseline CD4 cell counts and plasma HIV-1 RNA levels. Combination therapy offers the possibility of delaying or preventing the development of HIV drug resistance via interacting drug resistance mutations or potent antiviral activity. Widespread use of ZDV has been associated with transmission of ZDV-resistant HIV-1 in approximately 10% of adult seroconverters and a significant percentage of infants who fail the AIDS Clinical Trial Group (ACTG) 076 prophylactic regimen.