Chromosomal or plasmid-encoded beta-lactamases are the most frequent causes of resistance to broad-spectrum beta-lactam antibiotics in clinical isolates of Gram-negative bacteria. Different screening methods can be used for their detection during routine laboratory work, while molecular biological methods may help in the detection of the genetic background of the phenotypic resistance. Clinical isolates of Klebsiella pneumoniae (170) and Enterobacter cloaceae (82) were obtained from different parts of Hungary, whereas those of Serratia marcescens (15) were isolated in our Department from a nosocomial outbreak. Disk diffusion and the Etest were used to screen inducible Class C beta-lactamase and plasmid-mediated extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) among clinical isolates of Enterobacteriaceae. Single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of the PCR products obtained after using SHV-specific primers revealed the presence of SHV-2 and SHV-5 ESBL among 170 K. pneumoniae strains in 12 and 3 cases, respectively. The results of the screening methods and the PCR-SSCP analysis suggested that 14 of the 15 S. marcescens strains not only produced the Class C, inducible chromosomal beta-lactamase, but also acquired a plasmid-mediated SHV-2-type ESBL. One strain isolated from the environment during the outbreak was genetically related to the other isolates, as demonstrated by the different typing methods, but it did not produce ESBL. The in vivo transfer of SHV-2 gene was assumed from an SHV-2 positive K. pneumoniae strain present in the same ward, in the same patient and at the same time. A very high prevalence of the stable derepressed mutants of E. cloaceae was confirmed among the Hungarian isolates. Seventy seven per cent of the strains produced high amounts of beta-lactamase without induction being responsible for their resistance to third-generation cephalosporins. Nineteen per cent of the strains were inducible when cefoxitin or imipenem was used, as confirmed by direct measurement of the MICs with the Etest.