When Proteus mirabilis harboring the R factor NR1 is cultured in Penassay broth containing 100 mug of chloramphenicol (CM) per ml, there is an amplification in the number of copies of the r-determinants per cell. Under these conditions, R factors harboring multiple tandem sequences of r-determinants are formed. Autonomous poly-f-determinants consisting of multiple copies of r-determinants are also formed. This phenomenon has been referred to as the "transition". Transitioned cells have considerably higher levels of resistance to CM and streptomycin (SM), but not to tetracycline (TC), than do nontransitioned cells and grow more rapidly in medium containing either CM or SM. There is essentially no difference in growth rates between transitioned and nontransitioned cells in drug-free medium. The higher level of resistance of transitioned cells to SM has made it possible to investigate the mechanism of the transition. Using replica plating, it has been possible to isolate spontaneously occurring transitioned cells from a nontransitioned population which appear to outgrow the nontransitioned cells during growth in medium containing 100 mug of CM per ml. If transiitoned cells are subsequently cultured in drug-free medium, the cells return gradually to the nontransitioned state, which has been referred to as the "back-transition was monitored by examining the level of resisitance of the cells to SM. In both situations the cell populations were found to be heterogeneous, consisting of a mixture of nontransitioned and transitioned cells. Under the conditions of our experiments, the transition appeared to be due to the more rapid growth of a minor fraction of spontaneously occurring transitioned cells which outgrew the remainder of cells in the population. To obtain the transition, the drug resistance gene must reside on the r-determinants component of the R factor. The transition did not take place when the cells were cultured in medium containing high concentrations of TC. This indicates that the TC resistance genes reside on the resistance transfer factor component of the R factor, which is in agreement with physical studies on R factor deoxyribonucleic acid.