Mutants of Escherichia coli K-12 unable to grow on any of the three naturally occurring hexitols D-manitol, D-glucitol, and galactitol and, among these specifically, mutants with altered transport and phosphorylating activity have been isolated. Different isolation procedures have been utilized, including suicide by D-[3H]mannitol, chemotaxis, and resistance to the toxic hexitol analogue 2-deoxy-arabino-hexitol. Mutations thus obtained have been mapped in four distinct operons. (i) Mutations affecting an enzyme II-complexmt1 activity of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system all map in gene mtlA. This gene has previously been shown (Solomon and Lin, 1972) to be part of an operon, mtl, located at 71 min on the E. coli linkage map containing, in addition to mtlA, the cis-dominant regulatory gene mtlC and mtlD, the structural gene for the enzyme D-mannitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase. The gene order in this operon, induced by D-mannitol, is mtlC A D. (ii) Mutations in gene gutA affecting a second enzyme II-complexgut of the phosphotransferase system map at 51 min, clustered in operon gutC A D together with the cis-dominant regulatory gene gutC and the structural gene gutD for the enzyme D-glucitol-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The gut operon, previously called sbl or srl, is induced by D-glucitol. (iii) Mutations affecting the transport and catabolism of galactitol are clustered in a third operon, gatC A D, located at 40.5 min. This operon again contains a cis-dominant regulatory gene, gatC, the structural gene gatD for galactitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase, and gene gatA coding for a thrid hexitol-specific enzyme II-complexgat. Other genes coding for two additional enzymes involved in galactitol catabolism apparently are not linked to gatC A D. (iv) A fourth class of mutants pleiotropically negative for hexitol growth and transport maps in the pts operon. Triple-negative mutants (mtlA gutA gatA) do not have further transport or phosphorylating activity for any of the three hexitols.