A mutation (ery-r8) conferring a high level of resistance to erythromycin in the Challis strain of Streptoccus sanguis can be transferred to wild-type erythromycin-sensitive recipients via single molecules of donor DNA. The transformants thus produced are of two types: (1) cells slightly more resistant to erythromycin than wild-type and capable of segregating (at a frequency of 2 X 10(-4)/bacterium/generation) either wild-type or highly-resistant cells like the original donor type; (2) cells phenotypically and genotypically identical to the original donor type. The unstable diploids (ery-r8/+) occur with a frequency equivalent to that obtained with high-efficiency (HE) markers, whereas the stable donor-type (ery-r8) transformants occur with about five hundred times lower frequency. Penetration of the wild-type recipient by more than one molecule of DNA bearing the ery-r8 marker increases by as much as seven times the incidence of stable transformants. UV-irradiation of molecules bearing the ery-r8 marker diminishes their ability to cooperate in producing a stable transformant, although the UV sensitivity of stable transformant production by a single DNA molecule is not different from that of diploid production. Hence, stable transformants do not appear to be produced by a process typical of low efficiency (LE) markers, which are generally highly sensitive to ultraviolet irradiation. Moreover, stable ery-r8 transformants are produced with equally low frequencies in strains of S. pneumoniae that discriminate (hex+) and fail to discriminate (hex--) between HE and LE markers. We postulate that all transformations by the ery-r8 marker result in ery-r8/+ diploids, and that segregation results in the infrequent stable transformants of the original donor type. This hypothesis is supported by the observations that rifampin treatment of ery-r8/+ populations increases the frequency of segregation and similar treatment of wild-type recipients under-going transformation by the ery-r8 marker increases the frequency of stable transformants.--In producing the ery-r8/+ transformant the r8 allele is integrated close to the site of its wild-type homolog, since single molecules of DNA from this transformant can be shown to carry both alleles. Segregation of either the ery-r8 or + allele is not detectably enhanced by acridine orange or thymidine deprivation.--The ery-r8 marker occurs close to a site of mutation (ery-r2) which confers erythromycin resistance upon ribosomes. When the r2 and r8 markers are jointly transferred, ery-r2-r8/+ genomes are produced in which the r2 marker is stably integrated but the r8 marker is unstably adjoined to its wild-type homolog. Thus, the duplicated region can be quite short. When the ery-r8 marker is stably integrated, the region of the marker is refractory to subsequent transformation. Markers with properties like ery-r8 are not particularly rare, being found with a frequency of about 4% among spontaneous mutations to erythromycin resistance.