Mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae resistant to the antibiotic mucidin, a specific inhibitor of electron transport between cytochrome b and c, were isolated and divided into three phenotypic groups, as follows. Class 1 mutants were cross-resistant to a variety of mitochondrial inhibitors and exhibited no resistance at the mitochondrial level. Class 2 mutants were specifically resistant to mucidin exhibiting resistance also at the level of isolated mitochondria. Biochemical studies indicated that the mucidin resistance in class 2 mutants involved a modification of mucidin binding of inhibitory sites on the mitochondrial inner membrane without a significance change in the sensitivity of mitochondrial oxygen uptake to antimycin A, 2-heptyl-4-hydroxyquinoline-N-oxide, and 2,3-dimercaptopropanol. Class 3 was represented by a mutant which showed a high degree of resistance to mucidin and was cross-resistant to a variety of mitochondrial inhibitors at the cellular level but exhibited only a resistance to mucidin at the mitochondrial level. Genetic analysis of mucidin-resistant mutants revealed the presence of both nuclear and mitochondrial genes determining mucidin resistance/sensitivity in yeast. Resistance to mucidin in class 1 mutants was due to a single-gene nuclear recessive mutation (mucPR) whereas that in class 2 mutants was caused by mutations of mitochondrial genes. Resistance in class 3 mutant was determined both by single-gene nuclear and mitochondrial mutations. In the mitochondrial mutants the mucidin resistance segregated mitotically and the resistance determinant was lost upon induction of petite mutation by ethidium bromide. Allelism tests indicated that the mucidin resistance mutations fell into two genetic loci (MUC1 and MUC2) which were apparently not closely linked in the mitochondrial genome. Recombination studies showed that the two mitochondrial mucidin loci were not allelic with other mitochondrial loci RIB1, RIB2 and OLI1. An extremely high mucidin resistance at the cellular level was shown to arise from synergistic interaction of the nuclear gene mucPR and the mitochondrial mucidin-resistance gene (MR) in a cell. The results suggest that at least two mitochondrial gene products, responsible for mucidin resistance/sensitivity in yeast, take part in the formation of the cytochrome bc1 region of the mitochondrial respiratory chain.