The present study was undertaken to clarify the mechanism of the diabetogenic activity of streptozotocin. Experiments were conducted to determine the resistance of animals to the diabetogenic action of streptozotocin; to follow the time course of irreversible beta-cell damage, and to determine the influence on streptozotocin action of certain compounds. Streptozotocin, a broad spectrum antibiotic, with antitumoral properties, was shown to be diabetogenic in rats and mice, but not in cats, rabbits, or guinea pigs. Intravenous or intraperitoneal administration of 65 mg/kg body weight of streptozotocin to male Wistar rats evoked a tri-phasic blood sugar response. It induced an initial hyperglycemic peak with no apparent change in plasma insulin concentrations, followed by profound hypoglycemia caused by liberation of large amounts of insulin from the pancreas. Forty-eight hours after injection, the animals were completely diabetic. Light- and electron-microscopic exadminations during the first forty-eight hours after the injection of streptozotocin showed pyknosis, degranulation and marked degeneration of the beta-cells. 1egenerative and necrotic changes were also seen in a few alpha-cells. These streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats revealed polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia and glucosuria, and decreased body weight. Blood sugar, plasma FFA and insulin concentrations were examined after oral administration of glucose (OGTT: 3g/kg). Blood sugar and plasma FFA were significantly elevated but plasma insulin concentrations were markedly decreased, so insulin treatments were most effective in these animals. It has been reported that nicotinamide prevents the diabetogenic activity of streptozotocin and the deformity action of 6-aminonicotinamide and 3-acetylpridine. Pre-treatment with picolinamide, methyl-nicotinamide, and nicotinohydroxamic acid also blocked its diabetogenic action, but nicotinic acid, mannoheptulose and glucose were ineffective. N-nitrosodimethylamin and ethyl-N-nitrosomethylcarbamate were devoid of diabetogenicity. It seems that streptozotocin interfers with NAD formation in the beta-cell. Functioning pancreatic islets cell tumors were observed on the rats both at 407 days after streptozotocin administration and at 473 days after streptozotocin administration with nicotinamide (500 mg/kg, i.p.).