Of the dideoxynucleosides described to date, the purine analogues ddA and ddI have exhibited very favorable therapeutic ratios in vitro. ddI is presently undergoing extensive phase I-II clinical trials. Whereas the action of adenosine deaminase (ADA) and purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) is usually to convert a given analogue of Ado to an inactive or less active form, ddI appears to retain the same biological activity as that of the parent ddA. An explanation for these observations was possible when we found that ddI (1) underwent only a slow cleavage to hypoxanthine through the action of PNP and (2) accumulated the same active antiviral metabolite (i.e., ddATP) as ddA in human lymphoid cells. The use of human lymphoid cells with deficiencies in cellular nucleoside kinases and of inhibitors of pathways of nucleotide metabolism have also revealed new aspects of dideoxypurine metabolism in human lymphoid cells, including the identification of a salvage pathway (phosphotransferase/5'-nucleotide pathway) by which ddA/ddI may be metabolized preferentially to the active nucleotide. The effectiveness of ddA and ddI as orally administered antiviral agents may be limited by their susceptibility to acid hydrolysis and the low efficiency for nucleotide conversion in human lymphoid cells. The presence of a fluorine atom in the arabinose configuration on C-2 confers resistance to solvolysis and renders the analogue less susceptible to enzymatic deamination and resistant to phosphorylytic cleavage by PNP. In addition, human lymphoid cells accumulated several fold higher levels of the putative active triphosphate, 2'-F-dd-ara-ATP, than those of ddA or ddI. This increased accumulation of the analogue triphosphate could be accounted for by a more direct conversion of 2'-F-dd-ara-A by a direct phosphorylation through dCyd kinase than ddA. Thus, a single substitution with fluorine at the 2' "up" position of the sugar moiety of ddA markedly improves several biochemical properties relating to dideoxynucleotide accumulation in human lymphoid cells. Whether there are significant alterations of other biochemical properties, such as the ability of the analogue triphosphate to interact with the target enzyme reverse transcriptase, has not yet been determined. Thus, a definitive resolution of the relative merit of ddA/ddI and its 2'-fluoro-arabinosyl analogue is not yet possible on the basis of the studies described here.