Sensitivity spectra of major species of bacteria (namely Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., Proteus spp., Citrobacter spp., Enterobacter spp., Serratia marcescens and Pseudomonas aeruginosa) which were among the clinical isolates mentioned in the first and second reports to various antibacterial and antibiotic agents and time courses of the spectra are reported below. 1. E. coli was sensitive to cefmenoxime (CMX), latamoxef (LMOX), ceftazidime (CAZ), cefzonam (CZON) and flomoxef (FMOX) which are third generation cephems, carumonam (CRMN) which is a monobactam, imipenem (IPM) which is a carbapenem, ofloxacin (OFLX) and ciprofloxacin (CPFX) which are new quinolones. Compared to the preceding 5-year period, sensitivities to most drugs have increased. 2. Klebsiella spp. were sensitive to CMX, CZON and FMOX which are third generation cephem antibiotics, CRMN which is a monobactam and gentamicin (GM) and arbekacin (HBK) which are aminoglycosides. Compared to the preceding 5-year period, the sensitivity on the whole has increased slightly. 3. Proteus spp. were sensitive to CMX, LMOX, CAZ and CZON which are third generation cephems, CRMN, a monobactam and OFLX and CPFX which are new quinolones. Compared to the preceding 5-year period, increased sensitivities, particularly to parenteral cephems, were found. 4. Citrobacter spp. were sensitive to CPFX which is a new quinolone antibiotic and CRMN, a monobactam. Compared to the preceding 5-year period, the sensitivity as a whole increased but there were still strains against which cefotiam, cefmetazole and, cefoperazone (CPZ) showed high MIC values. 5. Enterobacter spp. were sensitive to OFLX and CPFX, which are new quinolones, IPM, a carbapenem, and GM and HBK which are aminoglycosides. Compared to other bacteria, bacteria of this group were less sensitive to CPZ, CAZ, CZON, and FMOX which are third generation cephems. Compared to the preceding 5-year period, slight increases in sensitivity were found in cases of simple urinary tract infections. 6. S. marcescens as a whole was not very sensitive to antibiotics tested. Compared to the preceding 5-year period, sensitivities to CRMN and minocycline improved slightly. 7. P. aeruginosa was not very sensitive to any drug, as other bacteria were. Compared to the preceding 5-year period, sensitivities to new quinolones OFLX and CPFX and carbapenem IPM decreased slightly.