The diagnostic work-up of any serious infection constitutes an emergency. The most innocuous-appearing respiratory infection can proceed to fatal meningitis in a matter of hours, and minor urinary tract symptoms can herald a syndrome of overwhelming sepsis. Recent publications have emphasized the development of new laboratory culture techniques for the rapid identification of infectious agents. At best, these techniques require several hours and are susceptible to many artifacts of specimen collection and storage prior to the time the sample reaches the laboratory. Accurate assessment of the probable causes of serious infection can be made by the examining clinician within minutes to an hour after first seeing a febrile patient. This is accomplished by coupling carefully selected history and physical features with the proper collection of specimens and the use of a few simple staining techniques. The goal of this rapid diagnostic work-up is elucidation of the causative organism, allowing use of the fewest possible antibiotics that combine the proper antimicrobial spectrum with the least toxicity to the patient. The choice of the right therapeutic agent is extremely important for several reasons. First, infections constitute the only medical conditions that may be susceptible to true cure rather than amelioration. Second, bacteria may develop resistance to an antibiotic with a frequency roughly proportional to the degree to which the antibiotic is used. Therefore, injudicious use of broad-spectrum antibiotics may shorten the time during which they remain useful by hastening the evolution of a new population of resistant microorganisms. Third, use of broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy perturbs the normal flora, promoting overgrowth of opportunistic organisms such as fungi. The physician treating a patient with an infectious disease therefore has the capacity to alter the pathogenesis of diseases not only in the patient but also in the hospital population and the community at large. The emergent nature of infections, the possibility of bringing about real cure, and the potential ill effects of antibiotic misuse make it incumbent upon the physician to ascertain the etiology of the infection rapidly and accurately, and to use the narrowest spectrum of effective drugs. The prime prerequisite for accurate laboratory work-up of any infectious disease is proper collection of appropriate specimens. Infectious disease consultants are frequently asked to review "sputum" specimens used in the initial diagnosis of a patient who has not responded well to therapy, only to find saliva rather than sputum. Whether used for staining and microscopic examination or for culture, specimens must be collected properly. Following is a discussion of the laboratory work-up of four commonly analyzed specimens: cerebrospinal fluid, sputum, urine, and blood. Many of the techniques described for collection and processing of these samples are also valid for specimens such as synovial and pleural fluid.