Folic acid plays a central role in anabolic metabolism by supplying single-carbon units at varied levels of oxidation for both nucleotide and amino acid biosyntheses. It has been proposed that 5-amino-4-imidazole carboxamide riboside 5'-triphosphate (ZTP), an intermediate in de novo purine biosynthesis, serves as a signal of cellular folate stress and mediates a physiologically beneficial response to folate stress in Salmonella typhimurium (B. R. Bochner, and B. N. Ames, Cell 29:929-937, 1982). We examined the physiological response of Escherichia coli to folate stress induced by the drugs psicofuranine, trimethoprim, and sodium sulfathiazole or by p-aminobenzoic acid (pABA) starvation. Analysis of nucleotide pools showed that psicofuranine or trimethoprim treatment of a prototrophic strain or growth of a pABA auxotroph on limiting pABA induced the production of the nucleotide ZTP, as previously observed in S. typhimurium by Bochner and Ames. Accumulation of ZTP and its precursor 5-amino-4-imidazole carboxamide riboside 5'-monophosphate (ZMP) did not correlate well with folate stress in E. coli, as measured by determination of the folate/protein ratios of extracts of treated cells. Treatment of cells with psicofuranine caused a marked accumulation of 5-amino-4-imidazole carboxamide ribonucleotides (Z-ribonucleotides) but a statistically insignificant drop in the folate/protein ratio of cell extracts. Sodium sulfathiazole treatment at a drug concentration that led to a threefold drop in the growth rate and in the folate/protein ratio of treated cells led to little accumulation of Z-ribonucleotides in E. coli A purF his+ strain which produces ZTP and ZMP when treated with trimethoprim was constructed. In this strain, histidine represses the synthesis of both ZMP and ZTP. Treatment of cells of this strain with trimethoprim resulted in a decrease in the folate/protein ratio of cell extracts, but a blockade of Z-ribonucleotide accumulation did not affect the extent of folate depletion seen in treated cells and had only a small effect on the resistance of this strain to growth inhibition by trimethoprim. The patterns of protein expression induced by treatment of this strain with trimethoprim or psicofuranine were examined by two-dimensional electrophoretic resolution of the total cellular proteins. No differences in protein expression were seen when the treatment were performed in media containing or lacking histidine. These studies failed to provide evidence in E. coli for a folate stress regulon controlled by ZTP.