Human prolactinoma cells in culture secrete the monomeric nonglycosylated form of human PRL (NG-hPRL) and its glycosylated variant (G-hPRL). We have performed pulse-chase experiments to investigate the individual patterns of release of these two molecular variants. The cells were pulse labeled for 10 min with [35S]methionine and then chased for increasing periods of time up to 24 h. The secretion of newly synthesized G- and NG-hPRL was followed by immunoprecipitation of the chase medium and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis. Both forms were rapidly released (10 min of chase), but presented with different rates of secretion. Half-maximal release of G-hPRL occurred with 60-min chase, while 110 min were necessary for NG-hPRL. More than 50% of initially labeled G-hPRL was released in the medium vs. only 20% for NG-hPRL. Incubation of the cells with 8-chloroadenosine-cAMP during a 2-h chase period resulted in a 3.6-fold increase in the release of newly synthesized NG-hPRL and had only a slight effect on newly synthesized G-hPRL release (1.7-fold increase). The intracellular transit of labeled G- and NG-hPRL was investigated in cells treated by the ionophore monensin. The secretions of both newly synthesized forms were inhibited to the same extent, probably via an arrest of the transit at the level of the median Golgi, as judged by the delay of acquisition to endoglycosidase-H resistance for G-hPRL in monensin-treated cells. In contrast, Western blot analysis of the same medium-showed that monensin abolished the secretion of G-hPRL and had little effect on NG-hPRL. Our results on the different rates of secretion of G- and NG-hPRL indicate a sorting of the two forms into different compartments in the secretory pathway, with G-hPRL being secreted at a higher rate than NG-hPRL, possibly via a different intracellular route. The differential effects of 8Cl-cAMP and monensin further suggest that G-hPRL may be constitutively secreted after synthesis, while NG-hPRL secretion may involve a storage step.