Analysis of expression of the Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV) and of the spleen focus forming virus (SFFV) has been undertaken in highly malignant interferon (IFN)-sensitive (745) and IFN-resistant (3Cl-8) Friend leukemia cells (FLC), serially passaged intraperitoneally in DBA/2 mice. In vivo passaged 745 cells, as well as the clones derived thereof, did not release Friend virus (FV). Western blot analysis of the plasma membrane fractions of the virus nonproducer 745 cells revealed the lack of gp69/70 glycoprotein expression. At least 10 intraperitoneal passages of virus producer in vitro passaged of virus producer in vitro passaged 745 cells were necessary to obtain the selection of the virus nonproducer phenotype. In contrast in vivo passaged 3Cl-8 cells continued to produce FV even after 100 in vivo passages and expressed gp69/70 antigens to a similar extent as the original in vitro passaged FLC. The expression of F-MuLV and SFFV RNAs in virus producer and virus nonproducer FLC clones has been investigated by means of Northern blot technique using probes specific for either F-MuLV or SFFV. No F-MuLV specific RNA sequences were detected in virus nonproducer 745 clones. SFFV specific RNA transcripts and gp52/55 glycoprotein production could be revealed in all the FLC tested. Southern blot analysis showed the presence of F-MuLV specific sequences in the cellular DNA of virus nonproducer 745 clones. As both in vivo passaged F-MuLV producer 3Cl-8 and F-MuLV nonproducer 745 cells were equally barely immunogenic and highly malignant when injected into syngeneic DBA/2 mice, these results indicate that F-MuLV expression does not result per se in a high immunogenic potential of tumor cells. For the time being, as a specific property of 3Cl-8 versus 745 cells is the interferon-resistant phenotype, it is tempting to speculate that the selection of virus nonproducer cell variants after in vivo passages of interferon-sensitive 745 cells could depend on the presence of low levels of endogenous interferon in normal young mice.