HeLA H23 cells are a mutant female human tumor cell line harboring defective hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT; IMP-pyrophosphate phosphoribosyltransferase, EC 2.4.2.8) as a result of a mutation that alters the isoelectric point of the enzyme (G. Milman, E. Lee, G. S. Changas, J. R. McLaughlin, and J. George, Jr., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73:4589-4592, 1976). As shown by Milman et al. and confirmed by us here, rare HAT+ revertants arise spontaneously at 1.9 X 10(-8) frequency and express both mutant and wild-type polypeptides. Thus, the H23 mutant also carries a silent wild-type HPRT allele that is activated in revertants. To test whether the silent allele was activated via hypomethylation of genomic DNA, H23 cells were treated with inhibitors of DNA methylation, and revertants were scored by HAT or azaserine selection. At an optimal dose of 5 microM 5-azacytidine, the reversion frequency was increased about 50-fold when assayed by HAT selection and over 1,000-fold when assayed by azaserine selection. HAT+ and azaserine revertants were heterozygous for HPRT, expressing both wild-type and mutant HPRT polypeptides. Like spontaneous revertants, they contained active HPRT enzyme and were genetically unstable, reverting at about 10(-4) frequency. Similar results were found after treatment with N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine, a DNA-alkylating agent and potent inhibitor of mammalian DNA methylation. By contrast, the DNA-ethylating agent, ethyl methanesulfonate (EMS), did not increase the HAT+ reversion frequency; it did, however, increase the frequency by which H23 revertants heterozygous for HPRT reverted to 6-thioguanine resistance. Of nine EMS revertants, seven lacked HPRT activity and had a substantially reduced expression of the wild-type polypeptide. These observations support the hypothesis that DNA methylation plays an important role in human X-chromosome inactivation and that EMS can inactivate gene expression by promoting enzymatic methylation of genomic DNA as found previously for the prolactin gene in GH3 rat pituitary tumor cells (R. D. Ivarie and J. A. Morris, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79:2967-2970, 1982; R. D. Ivarie, J. A. Morris, and J. A. Martial, Mol. Cell. Biol. 2:179-189, 1982).