The antibacterial activities, absorption and excretion of talampicillin hydrochloride were compared with those of amoxicillin and ampicillin. Talampicillin hydrochloride showed a broad-spectrum antibacterial activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria as seen in amoxicillin and ampicillin. The antibacterial activities of talampicillin hydrochloride, amoxicillin and ampicillin were quite similar. In experimental murine infection with Staphylococcus aureus, protective effect of talampicillin hydrochloride was superior to ampicillin. For Escherichia coli infection, protective effect of talampicillin hydrochloride was similar to that of amoxicillin, while ampicillin was less active than both talampicillin hydrochloride and amoxicillin. The absorption and excretion of 250 mg equivalent doses of talampicillin hydrochloride, amoxicillin and ampicillin were compared in nine fasting healthy volunteers after oral administration of these antibiotics in randomized triple crossover study. In order to calculate the pharmacokinetic parameters, plasma levels were analyzed using an one-compartment open model, as well as area under the plasma concentration curve (AUC) and urinary excretion. Maximum plasma levels calculated were 2.8 times higher for talampicillin hydrochloride and 1.45 times higher for amoxicillin than for ampicillin. AUC was greater for talampicillin hydrochloride than for amoxicillin and lowest for ampicillin. Urinary excretion of talampicillin hydrochloride as penicillin determined in biological assay was comparable to that of amoxicillin and 1.55 times higher than that of ampicillin. Penicillins can be metabolized to penicilloic acids in the body. After taking into account the penicilloic acid contents in urine, total excretion in urine was 61% for talampicillin hydrochloride, 67% for amoxicillin and 42% for ampicillin during 6 hours after dosing. The absorption of the drugs was evaluated according to the plasma levels, the area under plasma concentration curve and the percentage of excretion in urine. The results obtained showed that talampicillin hydrochloride was well absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract.