The growth of Rickettsia prowazekii Madrid E was monitored in mouse L929 cells subcultured for several weeks in the presence of gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) to determine whether the rickettsiae would be eliminated from or would persist in these cultures. R. prowazekii exhibited two distinct patterns in these IFN-gamma-treated cultures. In some cases, IFN-gamma-induced inhibition of rickettsial growth led to elimination of the rickettsiae from the L929 cell cultures; in other cases, the initial inhibition of rickettsial growth was followed by establishment of a persistent rickettsial infection in the IFN-gamma-treated L929 cells. During the first 3 days after infection, the growth rate of the L929 cells was significantly lower and higher percentages of the cells were killed in the IFN-gamma-treated, R. prowazekii-infected cultures than in the untreated, R. prowazekii-infected cultures or the mock-infected cultures, whether treated or untreated. This suppression of cell growth occurred in the infected, IFN-gamma-treated cultures that eventually exhibited the elimination pattern as well as the IFN-gamma-treated cultures that became persistently infected. It was not possible to predict the outcome of a particular infection from the early growth pattern of the culture. It was determined that the L929 cells in the persistently infected, IFN-gamma-treated cultures had not lost the ability to respond to IFN-gamma. These cells, after treatment with an antibiotic to eliminate the persistent rickettsiae, retained the ability to inhibit both the replication of vesicular stomatitis virus and the growth of R. prowazekii Madrid E after treatment with IFN-gamma. In contrast, rickettsiae isolated from two persistently infected, IFN-gamma-treated cultures were less sensitive than R. prowazekii Madrid E to the antirickettsial effects of IFN-gamma in standard L929 cells. The maintenance of the phenotype of these altered rickettsiae during plaque purification and passage in the absence of IFN-gamma suggests an alteration at the genetic level rather than phenotypic adaptation.