We studied transepithelial transport of 3H-labeled hydrophobic cationic drugs in epithelia formed by wild-type and by drug-resistant Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCk) cells that had been infected with a retrovirus carrying the multidrug-resistance (MDR1) cDNA which encodes the P-glycoprotein. P-glycoprotein is an ATP consuming plasma membrane multidrug transporter responsible for the efflux of cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs from resistant cancer cells. Wild-type MDCK cells have small amounts of P-glycoprotein detected by immunoprecipitation. Net transepithelial transport across wild-type MDCK epithelia was demonstrated. Basal to apical flux of 100 nM vinblastine was about six times higher than apical to basal flux. Addition of unlabeled vinblastine reduced basal to apical flux of tracer and increased apical to basal flux of tracer, a pattern expected if there is a saturable pump that extrudes vinblastine at the apical plasma membrane. Daunomycin, vincristine, and actinomycin D were also actively transported and at 20 microM these agents inhibited transport of vinblastine, suggesting that wild-type MDCK cells have a common transporter for all these drugs. Vinblastine transport was also inhibited by 20 microM verapamil, which inhibits the multidrug transporter and reverses multidrug-resistance in non-polarized cells. Net transepithelial transport of all these cytotoxic drugs and of verapamil was much higher in epithelia formed by MDCK cells infected with a human MDR1 virus (MDR-MDCK) which is expressed on the apical surface of MDR-MDCK monolayers. Because the transport of these cytotoxic drugs and verapamil is increased in MDR-MDCK epithelia compared to wild-type MDCK epithelia, transport in both these cell populations can be attributed to P-glycoprotein. These results are consistent with a role for P-glycoprotein in multidrug secretory transport across the epithelium of the proximal tubule since P-glycoprotein is normally expressed on the apical membrane of proximal tubule cells.