We describe the development of resistance to trimetrexate and piritrexim (BW 301U) by a stepwise selection protocol in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Selection in trimetrexate resulted in initial resistance as a result of dihydrofolate reductase gene amplification. Several trimetrexate-resistant variants that display 250-340-fold and 25-50-fold resistance to lipophilic and hydrophilic antifolates, respectively, were established. Increased antifolate resistance was associated with a prominent overexpression of dihydrofolate reductase as determined from the elevated folate reductase activity, cellular labeling with fluorescein-methotrexate, and steady-state mRNA levels as a result of a consistent dihydrofolate reductase gene amplification. However, upon subsequent incremental increases in trimetrexate, further resistance was also associated with amplification of the multidrug resistance gene. This resulted in overexpression of P-glycoprotein and a subsequent 20-50-fold collateral resistance to pleiotropic drugs such as adriamycin, actinomycin D, vinca alkaloids, etoposide, and colchicine. In contrast, initial resistance following selection with low piritrexim concentrations resulted from an unknown mechanism(s) not involving overproduction of either dihydrofolate reductase or P-glycoprotein. This piritrexim resistance was shared with trimetrexate but not with methotrexate. Upon further selection with piritrexim, resistant variants emerge with amplified dihydrofolate reductase but not with multidrug resistance genes. These variants were subsequently resistant to both hydrophilic and lipophilic folate antagonists but retained sensitivity to pleiotropic drugs. The pattern of resistance with methotrexate, trimetrexate, and piritrexim shared a common mechanism, dihydrofolate reductase gene amplification, but differed regarding the additional amplification of the multidrug resistance gene in trimetrexate-resistant cells as well as the emergence of an additional unknown mechanism(s) of resistance to lipid-soluble antifolates upon initial selection in piritrexim.