Ciprofloxacin, a new fluoroquinolone, is a potent, broad-spectrum antibacterial agent. It rapidly blocks bacterial deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) replication by inhibiting DNA gyrase, an essential prokaryotic enzyme that catalyzes chromosomal DNA supercoiling. Molecular genetic approaches have been used to study the interaction of 4-quinolones with DNA gyrase from quinolone-sensitive strains and from uropathogenic quinolone-resistant clinical isolates of Escherichia coli. An important mutational locus in the gyrase A gene that confers resistance to ciprofloxacin and other quinolones has been identified, and a new, rapid method to examine clinical isolates for the presence of mutations at this position has been devised. A quinolone resistant gyrA gene has been previously cloned and sequenced from an E. coli clinical isolate. Genetic analysis indicated that resistance resulted from a Ser-83----Trp change in the 875 residue gyrase A protein: two other changes observed in the protein, Asp-678----Glu and Ala-828----Ser, were neutral. GyrA genes carrying these mutations have now been expressed, corresponding mutant gyrase A proteins purified, and their quinolone resistance properties tested by complementing with gyrase B protein and studying the resulting gyrase activity in an adenosine triphosphate-dependent DNA supercoiling assay. The in vitro DNA supercoiling activity of the A (Ser-83----Trp) mutant subunit complemented with wild-type gyrase B subunit was highly resistant to ciprofloxacin and other 4-quinolones. In contrast, A subunit carrying codon 678 and 828 changes reconstituted a quinolone-sensitive gyrase activity. Thus, quinolone-resistant gyrase A proteins may be readily obtained for study by using high-copy gyrA plasmids. In addition, other quinolone-resistant strains of E. coli have been examined for the presence of mutations at gyrase A codons 82 and 83 using a new analytical method based on a restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). This analysis revealed that seven of eight resistant clinical isolates of E. coli examined carried gyrA mutations at codon 82 or 83, whereas five sensitive strains appeared to possess wild-type sequence. Thus, mutations at codon 83 (and possibly 82) in the gyrA gene frequently confer resistance to 4-quinolones, including ciprofloxacin. The RFLP method described should prove useful in examining strains for such mutations. These results are discussed with regard to the mode of interaction of the 4-quinolones with gyrase.