When adipocytes were exposed to [3H]leucine for times ranging from 5 to 180 s, leucine was found to enter cells rapidly and equilibrate with the cell interior within 5 s. After an additional 15-30 s [3H]leucine was incorporated into nascent protein, and the rate of incorporation was linear for up to 6 h in both control and insulin-treated cells. Since treatment of adipocytes with 10 ng/ml insulin enhanced the rate of leucine incorporation 2-3-fold with minimal or no effect on the rate of protein degradation or leucine uptake, we conclude that the predominant effect of insulin is on enhancement of protein synthesis. To assess the time required for insulin to stimulate protein synthesis, we preincubated cells with 10 ng/ml of insulin for various times from 2 to 30 min and then measured [3H]leucine incorporation into protein during a 4-min assay. These results revealed that the insulin stimulation of protein synthesis is rapid (t 1/2 of 4.4 min), but 9-fold slower than insulin activation of glucose transport (t 1/2 less than 0.5 min under identical conditions). In contrast to the rapidity of insulin activation, we found that deactivation proceeded at much slower rates (t 1/2 of 32 and 21 min for protein synthesis and glucose transport, respectively). Desensitization of the glucose transport system has previously been shown to occur after adipocytes are exposed to high glucose and insulin. To examine the specificity of desensitization, we treated cells for 6 h with 20 mM glucose and 25 ng/ml insulin and then examined insulin sensitivity and maximal insulin responsiveness of both the glucose transport and protein synthesis systems. After treatment, the glucose transport was markedly insulin-resistant (60% loss in maximal insulin responsiveness and a marked loss in insulin sensitivity), whereas the protein synthesis system exhibited neither diminished insulin responsiveness nor loss of insulin sensitivity. In fact, insulin sensitivity actually increased, as indicated by the finding that less insulin was required to stimulate protein synthesis (insulin ED50 values of 0.25 and 18 ng/ml at 0 and 6 h of treatment). From these studies we conclude that desensitization of the glucose transport system by glucose and insulin treatment appears to be specific for this particular effector system and does not reflect a state of generalized cellular insulin resistance.