Early passage murine fibroblasts infected with retroviral vectors carrying human c-myc 'minigenes' express high levels of c-myc and have a dramatically shortened G1-phase of the cell cycle. Cells infected with viruses where c-myc is expressed from the viral LTR (MSN-4 virus) express more c-myc protein than cells infected with viruses where c-myc is expressed from the SV40 early promoter (NSM-7 virus). Populations of cells were infected with high titre viruses, selected for drug-resistance, pulse labelled with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) and chased in BrdUrd free media. This allows accurate, simultaneous, measurement of the rate of exit of unlabelled cells from G1 and progression of BrdUrd-labelled cells through S-phase. The length of the G1-phase in cell populations infected with the MSN-4 virus is 4.65 h, a reduction of nearly 30% compared to the G1-phase length of 6.50 h seen in cells infected with the VSN-2 control virus. Cells infected with NSM-7 virus show an intermediate phenotype and have a G1-phase of 5.25 h. The lengths of the S-phase (4.50 to 4.75 h) and G2 + M phases (2.75 h) were not significantly altered by exogenous c-myc expression. When chases are performed in growth-factor free media, the G1-phase of infected and non-infected cells is extended by approximately 2 h. Cells infected with the c-myc viruses continue to cycle more rapidly than uninfected cells. Growth factor-deprived cells, restimulated with serum, show similar alterations of the cell cycle kinetics. MSN-4 and NSM-7 infected cells, expressing high levels of c-myc, enter S-phase 2 to 4 h earlier, but less synchronously, than control cells, and sustain subsequent rounds of DNA synthesis, while control cells do not. However, cells carrying activated c-myc genes have nearly-normal morphologies and are not tumourgenic in syngenic mice. These results demonstrate that c-myc levels are rate limiting for events in G1, and the length of G1 varies proportionally with the level of exogenous c-myc expression.