Cefpodoxime proxetil (CPDX-PR, CS-807) is a new oral cephem derivative drug in which carboxylic acid was esterified to the 4-position of CPDX (oxime type cephem antibiotic). CPDX-PR is hydrolyzed mainly with esterase in intestinal wall and CPDX exists as an active form in body fluid. While there are numerous study reports using CPDX-PR in tablet forms in Japan, the dry syrup formula for pediatric use was newly developed. The dry syrup of CPDX-PR was orally administered 20 minutes after meal to the 6 boys of ages from 8 years and 1 month to 10 years and 10 months, with doses of 3 and 6 mg/kg, respectively, for 3 cases each. Serum concentrations and urinary concentrations and recovery rate of the drug were investigated. In addition to the above, the clinical and bacteriological studies were performed in a total of 105 cases consisting of children with ages ranging from 2 months to 11 years and 8 months, upon administering an average dose of 3.4 mg/kg, 3 to 4 times per day (96 cases of 3 times and 9 cases of 4 times). The 105 cases included 13 cases of pharyngitis, 21 cases of tonsillitis, 4 cases of acute bronchitis, 6 cases of pneumonia, 1 case of pleurisy, 13 cases of scarlet fever, 41 cases of urinary tract infection, 3 cases of posthitis and 3 cases of bacillary dysentery. Drug sensitivity test was performed for the following strains: (i) Strains retained by our department; 52 strains of Streptococcus pyogenes, 18 strains of Streptococcus agalactiae, and 11 strains of Bordetella pertussis, and (ii) strains isolated from cases to which CPDX-PR was administered; 2 strains of Staphylococcus aureus, 8 strains of S. pyogenes, 2 strains of Haemophilus influenzae, 10 strains of Escherichia coli, and 1 strain of Proteus mirabilis. Drug sensitivities of the strains retained by our department were tested with the inoculum sizes of 10(8) and 10(6) cfu/ml for R-3746 (Na-salt of CPDX), cefaclor (CCL), cephalexin (CEX), amoxicillin (AMPC), and methicillin (DMPPC), and those against strains separated from the cases to which CPDX-PR was administered were tested with the same inoculum sizes for R-3746, CCL, CEX, cefadroxil, ampicillin (ABPC), DMPPC and cloxacillin (MCIPC). Adverse reactions and abnormal clinical laboratory test results were also examined.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)