The most recent acquisitions on chemotherapy and chemoprophylaxis of malaria are reviewed. With regard to chemotherapy, candidate antimalarial compounds have been divided into four groups, according to their stages of development. Mefloquine and the combination of mefloquine with sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine belong to the first group: they have completed clinical trials and have been registered in several countries for routine clinical use. The second group is characterized by chemical compounds which are in an advanced stage of development, including clinical trials. The compounds considered in this group are: a) the 9-phenanthrenemethanols, among which halofantrine is the most promising one; b) the sesquiterpene lactones such as Qinghaosu, artemether, artesunate, artesunic acid and arteether which must be further tested in order to find more effective drug regimens capable of eliminating recrudescences and for the completion of toxicity studies; c) pyronaridine, which appears to be a promising antimalarial, effective also against chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum, but still requiring further investigations on resistance and cross-resistance, as well as its pharmacokinetics, tolerability and bioavailability; d) enpiroline, another promising compound, which needs to be further studied in Phase II and Phase III investigations with naturally acquired malaria. The third group is composed of seven chemical classes of compounds that are in an advanced pre-clinical development, namely: the 4-aminoquinolines, such as dabechin, piperaquine, hydroxypiperaquine, tripiperaquine, dichlor-quinazine and the Mannich base compounds, the 8-aminoquinolines, the 4-quinolinemethanols, the quinolones, the naphthoquinones, the quinazolines and the dihydrotriazines. Among the many antimalarial compounds of interest, which can be considered at the moment as leads for further studies, only the acridandione derivatives such as floxacrine, the antibiotics, antifungal agents or their metabolites, plant substances such as Yingzhaosu A and quassinoids have been mentioned. Malaria chemoprophylaxis, especially in chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum areas, has become a real problem. The attempts to secure protection under these circumstances with the utilization of amodiaquine, the combination of sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (Fansidar), sulfalene/pyrimethamine (Metakelfin), of pyrimethamine/dapsone (Maloprim), with or without chloroquine, had to be abandoned or to be used with caution in view of the severe complications following the weekly administration of these drugs. The combination of chloroquine with proguanil or chlorproguanil, which could be recommended on theoretical bases, did not meet the expectations when tested in the field. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)