The effect of recombinant murine interferon-gamma (rIFN-gamma) as single stimulus for the activation of antibacterial activity of macrophages was investigated on the basis of the rate of intracellular killing of Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella typhimurium by normal and rIFN gamma-activated peritoneal macrophages of CBA and C57BL/10 mice, which differ in natural resistance to infection by these bacteria. Eighteen hours after i.p. injection of 10 to 1 X 10(4) U rIFN-gamma, resident and exudate peritoneal macrophages which had phagocytosed L. monocytogenes or S. typhimurium in vivo, killed both species in vitro just as efficiently as did resident macrophages of normal mice. Similar results were obtained after 18 hr of in vitro incubation of resident or exudate peritoneal macrophages with 0.1 to 1 X 10(4) U/ml rIFN-gamma. Consistent with the in vitro findings, two i.v. injections of 5 X 10(4) U rIFN-gamma did not affect the rate of in vivo proliferation of L. monocytogenes or S. typhimurium in the spleens of mice during the first 2 days after i.v. injection of the bacteria. Compared with the effect on the controls, two i.p. injections of 5 X 10(2) to 5 X 10(4) U rIFN-gamma did not decrease the numbers of viable S. typhimurium in either the peritoneal cell suspension or the spleen 24 hr after i.p. injection of the bacteria. Checking the state of activation of rIFN-gamma-activated macrophages on the basis of two commonly used criteria for macrophage activation showed that rIFN-gamma-activated macrophages inhibited the intracellular replication of Toxoplasma gondii and displayed enhanced O2 consumption and H2O2 release after stimulation with phorbol myristate acetate compared with macrophages from normal CBA and C57BL/10 mice. The present findings show that as single activating stimulus, rIFN-gamma is not capable of activating the antibacterial effector functions of peritoneal macrophages against facultative intracellular pathogens such as L. monocytogenes and S. typhimurium.