The antitubulin fungicide benomyl suppressed the linear growth of Neurospora crassa wild type strain St. Lawrence 74 at micromolar concentrations. The rate of germination of macroconidia was not affected. Macroconidia exposed to 1.7 microM benomyl for 5 h formed multiple germ tubes. When germlings incubated for 4 h were exposed to 1.7 microM benomyl for 3 h, their germ tube stopped growing, swelled and emitted several branches. Normal linear growth was restored after removal of the fungicide. Linear growth of N. crassa was resistant up to 16 microM nocodazole. This drug induced multipolar germination at 8 microM, and griseofulvin only at 140 microM. The microtubule (MT) cytoskeleton of N. crassa could be revealed by indirect immunofluorescence with the monoclonal antibody YOL 1/34 directed against yeast alpha-tubulin. We detected no striking effects of the benomyl treatments on MT organization. The MT-stabilizing agents deuterium oxide (D2O) and cAMP have no antagonistic effects on the benomyl-induced multipolar germination. The positioning of nuclei and mitochondria was determined from the DAPI and Rhodamine 123 fluorescence patterns, respectively. Benomyl inhibited nuclear migration into multiple germ tubes. Quantitative scanning cytophotometry revealed a peak in the intensity of the mitochondria-associated Rhodamine 123 fluorescence near the apex of untreated germlings. This peak disappeared in multiple germ tubes. Benomyl-resistant mutant bml 511 (r), mutated in its beta-tubulin gene, germinated normally in the presence of the fungicide. This strongly suggests that multiple germ tube formation was due to the effect of benomyl on beta-tubulin. Benomyl-resistant strain 74-3, constructed by reintroducing the cloned mutant N. crassa beta-tubulin gene into the cells by transformation, displayed a partial resistance to benomyl with respect to multipolar germination. Its rate of germination was slow (50% germination reached after 4 h at 37 degrees C as compared to 2.5 h for the wild type). In contrast to N. crassa, the other ascomycete Aspergillus nidulans is nocodazole-sensitive (linear growth suppressed at 1.6 microM). It did not respond to the MT inhibitors benomyl and nocodazole with respect to the pattern of germ tube emergence. Our results suggest that microtubule or membrane beta-tubulin is involved in the maintenance of developmental polarity during germ tube emergence and growth of N. crassa.