1. The pH-sensitive dye 2',7'-bis-(2-carboxyethyl)-5 (and -6)-carboxyfluorescein (BCECF) was used to measure intracellular pH (pHi) in segments of rat resistance vessels (internal diameter about 200 microns) with the vessels mounted in a myograph for simultaneous measurements of isometric contraction. 2. BCECF loaded slowly into the vessels over 1 h and did not affect the maximal contractility of the vessels. There was a loss of dye with time which, however, was very slow when the segments were only excited for 2 s/min, suggesting that the loss was mainly due to dye bleaching with only a very slow leak. 3. The ratio of the emissions (at 540 nm) with excitation at 495 and 450 nm was calibrated in terms of pH using the K+-H+ ionophore nigericin. This calibration gave a pHi value of 7.15 +/- 0.02 (n = 20), suggesting that hydrogen ions are not in electrochemical equilibrium in these vascular smooth muscles which have a membrane potential of about -60 mV. 4. Addition of 10 mM-NH4Cl caused a transient alkalinization and wash-out of 10 mM-NH4Cl a transient acidification. Increasing CO2 with maintained bicarbonate caused a rapid acidification followed by an incomplete recovery. Removal of CO2 and bicarbonate (HEPES-buffered solution) with constant extracellular pH caused a transient alkalinization but steady-state pHi was not significantly altered. 5. In bicarbonate-free buffer the Na+-H+ exchange blocker 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl) amiloride (EIPA) and sodium-free conditions caused a slow acidification. In bicarbonate buffer (PSS) EIPA had no detectable effect after 10 min but the anion exchange blocker diisothio-cyanatostilbenedisulphonic acid (DIDS) caused a small acidification over that time course. 6. The rate of recovery after an acid load was about 50% lower in HEPES buffer compared to PSS and it was inhibited by EIPA. In PSS amiloride and EIPA each had a small inhibitory effect on the pH recovery after an acid load. DIDS also inhibited the recovery from an acid load in PSS and this effect was additive to that of EIPA. DIDS and EIPA also had additive inhibitory effects on the 22Na+ influx stimulated by the acid loading, while in HEPES buffer DIDS had no effect on either pH recovery or 22Na+ influx. These results suggest that a Na+-H+ exchange and an influx of bicarbonate coupled to sodium influx are of importance for pHi control in these vessels.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)