The kinetics of cell-mediated immunity developed during the course of Leishmania major infection in resistant (C57BL/6) and susceptible (BALB/c) mice were determined by using in vitro bioassays. Cells isolated from the lymph nodes draining the infected footpads were assayed for their proliferative responses to leishmania antigens (promastigote and amastigote) or to concanavalin A (Con A). Although lymph node cells (LNC) from both mouse strains proliferated to mitogen and antigen early after infection, both C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice developed diminished in vitro proliferative reactivity within 3 to 5 wk after infection. LNC from both mouse strains recovered lymphoproliferative reactivity to Con A (week 6), but only C57BL/6 mice regained reactivity to leishmania antigens. BALB/c cells remained unresponsive to leishmania antigens throughout the subsequent course of the infection. Supernatants derived from cultures of LNC that had been stimulated with Con A or leishmania antigens were assayed for interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) by analyzing three distinct activities associated with IFN-gamma. Culture supernatants derived from leishmania antigen stimulation of LNC from infected C57BL/6 mice, but not BALB/c mice, were able to induce surface Ia on murine P388D1 cells. Ia-inducing activity was detectable in supernatants from C57BL/6 cells as early as 3 wk, and peaked by 5 wk after infection. Although cells from infected BALB/c mice never produced detectable IFN-gamma in response to leishmania antigens, LNC from both mouse strains produced readily detectable IFN-gamma in response to Con A throughout the course of infection. Culture supernatants that induced Ia on P388D1 cells were also capable of activating resident peritoneal macrophages to display leishmanicidal activity and of inhibiting encephalomyocarditis virus replication in murine fibroblasts. Each of these activities could be removed by prior incubation of the supernatants with rabbit heterologous anti-murine IFN-gamma sera or monoclonal rat-anti-murine IFN-gamma. The correlation of healer status with the capacity to generate IFN-gamma in vitro in response to leishmania antigens was examined in BALB/c mice that had been exposed to sublethal irradiation (550 rad) before infection. These animals have been previously shown to effectively resist L. major infection. Consistent with observations in the genetically resistant C57BL/6 mice, LNC from these animals demonstrated the capacity to respond to in vitro leishmania antigen stimulation with lymphoproliferation, and more importantly, by producing IFN-gamma.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)