The genetic and embryotoxic effects of bis(tri-n-butyltin)oxide (TBTO) were evaluated in multiple in vivo and in vitro short-term tests preparatory to its potential wide use as a molluscicide in control of schistosomiasis. When tested in the rec assay in Bacillus subtilis, TBTO was not mutagenic and it did not induce reverse mutations in Klebsiella pneumoniae. Neither in the presence nor in the absecne of rat liver activation system did TBTO produce point mutations in Salmonella typhimurium strains TA1530, TA1535, TA1538, TA97, TA98 or TA100. TBTO was matagenic in strain TA100 in a fluctuation test, but only in the presence of rat liver S9 (Aroclor-induced). TBTO did not induce gene mutations in the yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, mitotic gene conversions in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, nor sister-chromatid exchange in Chinese hamster ovary cells in the presence or absence of rat or mouse liver S9. In the latter cells, structural chromosomal aberrations, endoreduplicated and polyploid cells were induced. TBTO did not induce gene mutations in V79 Chinese hamster cells (to 8-azaguanine-, ouabain- or 6-thioguanine-resistance) in the presence of a rat liver postmitochondrial fraction or in cell (hamster embryo cells and human and mouse epidermal keratinocyte)-mediated assays. In mouse lymphoma cells, TBTO did not induce 6-thioguanine- or BUdR-resistant mutations. As many tumour promoters inhibit metabolic cooperation between V79 Chinese hamster 6-thioguanine-resistant/-sensitive cells, TBTO was tested but showed no such activity. TBTO was examined for the induction of recessive lethal mutations in adult Berlin K male Drosophila melanogaster, either by feeding or by injection. Doses of 0.37 or 0.74 mM did not increase the number of X-linked recessive lethal mutations. An increased number of micronuclei was observed in the polychromatic erythrocytes of male BALB/c mice 48 h after a single oral dose of TBTO (60 mg/kg bw), while a lower dose (30 mg/kg bw) was ineffective. Neither of the two doses had induced micronuclei 30 h after treatment. The reproductive toxicity of TBTO was studied in NMRI mice. In a 10-day toxicity study, the LD50 and LD10 were 74 and 34 mg/kg bw, respectively. An increased frequency of cleft palates was seen in the fetuses of mice (compared with controls, 0.7%) treated orally during pregnancy with 11.7 mg/kg TBTO (7%), 23.4 mg/kg (24%) or 35 mg/kg (48%).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)