We investigated the use of high-content aminoglycoside disks for determining Enterococcus faecalis susceptibility to aminoglycoside-penicillin synergy. The susceptibility of the organisms to synergy was established by 24-h time-kill studies performed with streptomycin, kanamycin, amikacin, gentamicin, and tobramycin, alone and in combination with penicillin. A total of 20 isolates that were susceptible to all drug combinations and 20 strains that were resistant to each aminoglycoside-penicillin combination were selected for testing against high-content disks. Disk-agar diffusion was performed on Mueller-Hinton agar, with and without 5% sheep blood, by using disks that contained either 300 or 2,000 micrograms of streptomycin and either 120 or 2,000 micrograms of kanamycin, amikacin, tobramycin, or gentamicin. Zone size results obtained for each aminoglycoside, except amikacin, could be used to differentiate between synergy-susceptible and -resistant isolates. No overlap occurred between the zone sizes of susceptible and resistant strains. Susceptibility to amikacin-penicillin synergy could reliably be tested with kanamycin, but not amikacin, disks. When the disks containing 120 micrograms were tested, a narrow zone size range of 6 to 7 mm could be used to identify all resistant strains. In contrast, when the disks containing 2,000 micrograms were used, the zone size ranges for resistant isolates varied widely with the aminoglycoside being tested. The presence of blood in the medium did not appreciably affect the disk test results. To detect resistance to every aminoglycoside-penicillin combination that may be considered for therapy, E. faecalis isolates need to be tested against a maximum of three different high-content disks (i.e., streptomycin, gentamicin, kanamycin). The disk-agar diffusion test performed with high-content aminoglycoside disks can provide laboratories with a convenient and reliable method for detecting E. faecalis isolates that are resistant to aminoglycoside-penicillin synergy.