Puromycin-resistant (PurR) mutants/variants of a human carcinoma cell line (HeLa), which show greatly reduced cellular uptake of 3H-puromycin and 3H-daunomycin have been isolated after one- and two-step selections in presence of the drug. The cross-resistance pattern of these mutant cell lines towards numerous anticancer drugs and other inhibitors has been examined. Both the first- and the second-step mutants exhibited increased resistance to a number of antimitotic drugs (viz. vinblastine, vincristine, colchicine, taxol and maytansine), several protein synthesis inhibitors (viz. chalcomycin, bruceantin, harringtonine, homoharringtonine), a large number of DNA interactive compounds (viz. aclacinomycin A, actinomycin D, adriamycin, m-AMSA, chromomycin A3, coralyne sulphoacetate, daunomycin, ellipticine, mithramycin, mitoxantrone, 5-methoxysterigmatocystin, rubidazone, variamycin, VM26 and VP16-213) and a number of other drugs acting via other mechanisms (viz. Baker's antifol, nitidine chloride and rhodamine 123). Whereas the first-step mutants showed stable resistance to these drugs, the second-step lines partially reverted upon growth in non-selective medium. Further, treatment of these mutant lines with non-cytotoxic doses of the calcium channel blocker verapamil reverted or abolished their resistance to the above drugs in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast to the above compounds, the PurR mutants showed no significant cross-resistance to a large number of other drugs which included asaley, AT-125, 5-azacytidine, azaserine, cyclocytidine, cis-platin, cytosine arabinoside, chlorambucil, chlorpromazine, alpha-difluoromethyl ornithine, 5-fluorouracil, ftorafur, gallium nitrate, hydroxyurea, ICRF-159, ICRF-187, imipramine, methotraxate, 6-methylmercaptopurine riboside, mycophenolic acid, melphalan, mitomycin C, methyl GAG, nafoxidine, reumycin, 6-selenoguanosine, 6-thioguanine, tiazofurin, tamoxifen, thalicarpine, tiapamil and verapamil). These cross-resistance data should prove useful in developing suitable drug combinations to which cellular resistance would not develop readily.