A retrospective analysis of data from the treatment of 95 men with nonbacteremic urinary tract infections (UTIs) (clean-catch urinary bacterial count greater than or equal to 10(5) colony-forming units/ml) who received norfloxacin (400 mg orally twice daily) was performed. Treatment duration ranged from a required minimum of seven days to a maximum of 30 days. If an underlying anatomic or functional condition existed that might decrease the likelihood of a favorable medical response and/or require prolonged treatment, the patient's UTI was considered "complicated." In addition to eight patients with polymicrobic UTIs (usually involving enterococci or Pseudomonas aeruginosa), 48 men (i.e., 51 percent of the total population) had an identifiable complication. Complications included benign prostatic hypertrophy in 13 patients; prostatic cancer in four; urethral stricture in four; quadriplegia/paraplegia with indwelling urinary catheter in four; prostatism in three; and other conditions commonly recognized as altering the response to antibiotic treatment. Among the 95 patients treated, 76 (80 percent) were considered to have had a cure and five (5 percent) showed improvement. Fourteen patients (15 percent) failed to show a response to treatment. Of the 48 patients with UTI and defined complications, 36 (75 percent) had a cure, three (6 percent) showed improvement, and therapy failed in nine (19 percent). Ninety-seven percent (105 of 108) of the pretreatment bacterial isolates were susceptible to norfloxacin. In addition to the three resistant organisms that were present prior to therapy, three organisms (two P. aeruginosa and one Enterobacter) persisted and acquired resistance during therapy. Five adverse clinical experiences and six adverse laboratory experiences were noted. Only one of the former (mild heartburn) was thought to be drug related, and no adverse experience was considered serious or required discontinuation of treatment. Gastrointestinal tolerability of oral norfloxacin was good.