Individual chemoprophylaxis against malaria remains mandatory for all trips of brief or intermediate duration in endemic areas. The selected anti-malarial drug must be taken regularly from the beginning of the stay, during the stay and for the 30 days after return (The 30 days following the departure from regions at risk). Presently the following drugs are available: amino-4-quinolines, quinine, antifolinic agents, the association antifolinic-antifolic agents and mefloquine. Specific advantages, side-effects and adverse reactions, as well as dosage used for prophylaxis are given for each drug. The risk of agranulocytosis and severe hepatitis related to amodiaquine forbids its use until more information has become available. The association sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine is no longer recommended for prophylaxis by the French authorities and recently by the W.H.O., because of its potential, although seldom, risk of severe muco-cutaneous disorders. Detailed schemes of prophylaxis are given; they rely on sensitivity or resistance of Plasmodia strains, the length of the stay in at risk areas, and the local situation concerning the hazard of infection and drug resistance of Plasmodia. Chloroquine must be used in priority in areas characterized by sensitivity or low grade resistance to chloroquine. In order to avoid resistance to mefloquine, its administration has to be limited to prophylaxis for short stays and to the treatment of attacks resulting from infections acquired in areas known for resistance against the other drugs. Today, indeed, mefloquine is the single agent efficient in case of multiresistance to Plasmodium falciparum. The treatment of suspected or proved cases of malaria attacks occurring in temporary or permanent expatriates or in local, semi-immune residents, has become strongly advisable. In areas of resistance to chloroquine, either quinine (repeated injections), sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (per os or unique parenteral injection) or if possible, mefloquine (full dose during 1 day) are to be used for the therapy of acute attacks. Continuous chemoprophylaxis is no longer encouraged for populations living in holoendemic areas. Treatment of suspected or overt malaria crises is, however, mandatory. The limitation to curative therapy is opening the way to more specific prophylaxis: pregnancy, delivery, intercurrent pathological events, such as surgery, trauma, infection... It is hoped that, until the forthcoming of anti-malaria immunoprophylaxis, these newly adjusted designs for chemotherapy will help to keep the progress of malaria and the development of plasmodial resistance under control.