This article summarizes recent studies characterizing nucleoside transport in mammalian cells and discusses evidence for a role of membrane transport in the pharmacologic action of nucleoside analogues. Some of these studies have also addressed the controversy concerning the multiplicity in transport routes. It seems clear that erythrocytes and, perhaps, some other mammalian cells possess a single, broadly specific system for transporting nucleosides. However, substantial evidence from valid studies discriminating between transport and intracellular metabolism suggests that at least some mammalian cells, including some tumor cells, possess more than a single system. Evidence now exists for a determining role of membrane transport of nucleoside analogues in their cytotoxicity and, in the case of one pyrimidine nucleoside (AraC), in therapeutic responsiveness in leukemic patients. There are also numerous examples of transport-related resistance to nucleoside analogues. Included in this article are the results of studies from the authors' laboratory pertaining to the therapeutic activity of the purine nucleoside, FAraA, in murine tumor models. These studies provide evidence for a determining role of both membrane transport and intracellular phosphorylation in the selective antitumor action of this agent against murine leukemia. Substantially increased transport inward of FAraA occurs at pharmacologically achievable concentrations of this agent in tumor cells as compared to drug-limiting, normal proliferative epithelium of the small intestine. The basis for this differential appears to be the kinetic duality of FAraA and adenosine transport inward found in tumor cells, but not in proliferative intestinal epithelial cells. Tumor cells have highly saturable (low influx Km) and poorly saturable (high influx Km) systems for adenosine transport, both of which are shared by FAraA. In contrast, proliferative epithelial cells have only a poorly saturable system for these substrates. If a similar kinetic duality of nucleoside transport is found in other tumor cells certain implications arise concerning the significance of the duality to neoplastic transformation.