The in vitro and in vivo properties of a new 1-difluorophenyl-6-fluoroquinolone, temafloxacin hydrochloride (A-62254), were compared with those of difloxacin and ciprofloxacin. Temafloxacin hydrochloride was as active as ciprofloxacin and difloxacin against staphylococci and as active as ciprofloxacin and 2 twofold dilutions more active than difloxacin against streptococci. Against gram-negative enteric bacteria and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, temafloxacin hydrochloride was 2 twofold dilutions more active than difloxacin but 2 to 4 twofold dilutions less active than ciprofloxacin. The MICs of temafloxacin hydrochloride and difloxacin were increased by 2 to 5 twofold dilutions in urine at pH 6.5 compared with 4 to 5 twofold-dilution increases in the MICs of ciprofloxacin. The MICs of temafloxacin hydrochloride, difloxacin, and ciprofloxacin were increased by 1 to 3 twofold dilutions in serum. The MICs of temafloxacin hydrochloride, difloxacin, and ciprofloxacin were the same or within 1 to 2 twofold dilutions at pHs 6.5, 7.2, and 8.0. When administered orally in mouse protection tests, temafloxacin hydrochloride was as active as difloxacin and 5 to 10 times more active than ciprofloxacin against infections with Staphylococcus aureus and streptococci. Against infections with gram-negative enteric bacteria and P. aeruginosa, temafloxacin hydrochloride was as active as difloxacin and ciprofloxacin. Temafloxacin hydrochloride was three times less active than difloxacin but was five times more active than ciprofloxacin against infections with Salmonella typhimurium. Temafloxacin hydrochloride was as active as difloxacin and ciprofloxacin against P. aeruginosa and Proteus mirabilis pyelonephritis in mice. The peak serum concentration and serum half-life of temafloxacin hydrochloride in mice were approximately one-half and one-sixth, respectively, that of difloxacin after oral administration. The peak serum concentration of temafloxacin hydrochloride in mice after oral administration was six times higher than that of ciprofloxacin, and the serum half-life was equal to that of ciprofloxacin.