The antiviral activities and metabolic fates of E-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2'-deoxyuridine (BrVdUrd) and 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-E-5-(2-bromovinyl)uracil (BrVaraUra) were compared in a dThd kinase-deficient human fibroblast cell line, infected with parental strains of herpes simplex virus, and other strains expressing no viral dThd kinase activity. Metabolic experiments were performed at concentrations well above the ID50 for each compound because radiolabeled agents were not available. BrVaraUra and its nucleotides qualitatively displayed chromatographic and anabolic characteristics which closely paralleled those of BrVdUrd and its nucleotides. Monophosphorylation of both drugs was dependent upon the presence of viral dThd kinase activity except in the case of one dThd kinase-negative type 1 mutant (SC16R5C1) which retained BrVdUrd/BrVaraUra kinase activity. Intracellular uptake of either parent compound was absent during mock-infection and minimal in the cases of infection with mutants unable to phosphorylate the parent compound. Parental type 1 strains were able to induce diphosphorylation and triphosphorylation of both compounds to a similar, dose-dependent degree. Extracts of type 2-infected cells contained greater quantities of BrVdUrd and its monophosphate compared with BrVaraUra and its monophosphate, after identical drug exposure and infection conditions. As previously observed for BrVdUrd, diphosphorylated and triphosphorylated nucleotides of BrVaraUra were not detected after type 2 infection. BrVdUrd and BrVaraUra metabolic breakdown pathways differed, however, as evidenced by the formation of E-5-(2-bromovinyl)uracil (BrVUra). Unlike BrVdUrd, BrVaraUra formed no BrVUra in infected cells, suggesting that replacement of 2'-deoxyribose with arabinose makes the compound biologically more stable, presumably because of resistance to enzymatic breakdown by pyrimidine nucleoside phosphorylases. In this dThd kinase-negative cell line, BrVdUrd and BrVaraUra displayed qualitatively similar susceptibility profiles in that activities were type 1 selective and dThd kinase dependent. Antiviral activities against dThd kinase-positive type 1 strains were similar with both compounds. These data would suggest that BrVdUrd and BrVaraUra have identical type-specific dThd-dTMP kinase-dependent mechanisms of cellular uptake and phosphorylation, but that the latter is not subjected to phosphorolysis and resultant formation of an inactive metabolite. Furthermore, the absence of presence of phosphorolysis of the parent nucleoside does not apparently adversely affect in vitro antiviral activity.