We previously demonstrated that treatment of (C57BL/6 X A)F1 (F1) recipient mice with polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (pI:C) before injection with 30 X 10(6) C57BL/6 (B6) lymphocytes prevents both the immunosuppression and pathologic lesions typical of graft-vs-host (GVH) reactions. We now report the further characterization of this phenomenon. Donor spleen and lymph node cells were labeled with fluorescein in vitro and injected into pI:C-treated or untreated mice. Two days later, recipient splenocytes were analyzed for the presence of fluorescein-labeled donor cells by flow microfluorometry. Treatment of F1 mice with pI:C resulted in a sharp reduction in the recovery of labeled B6 but not A strain parental cells. Treatment with pI:C had no effect when syngeneic recipients were used, or when F1 cells were injected into A, B6, or F1 recipients. These results suggest that pI:C treatment induces rejection of B6 but not A or F1 lymphocytes by F1 hybrid mice at least as early as 2 days after donor cell transfer. As F1 cells are not rejected by either parent, rejection does not seem to be directed against classical alloantigens. These observations are compatible with the previously described model of hybrid resistance (HR) against bone marrow grafts. The rapidity of rejection strongly suggested that natural cytotoxic mechanisms were involved, thus, natural killer (NK) cell and macrophage (M phi) cytotoxic activities were tested throughout the time when the parental cell graft was being rejected. Over this period, pI:C treatment increased cytotoxic activity against the NK-sensitive target cell line YAC-1 but had no effect on spontaneous M phi tumoricidal activity against the L5178Y and MDAY-D2 cell lines. The results suggest that NK cells, but not M phi, may be involved in the elimination of B6 parental cells by the pI:C-treated F1 mice. NK cells have been demonstrated to be radioresistant; thus, as a test of our hypothesis, we examined the effects of irradiation on the capacity of pI:C treated F1 mice to reject B6 lymphocytes. The results show that this capacity was not blocked by 750 cGy, a dose of radiation that abrogates most T and B cell functions. Furthermore, rejection of parental cells could be prevented by treatment of recipient F1 mice with antibodies to asialo GM1, a treatment that suppresses NK activity. These data demonstrate that pI:C-mediated protection from GVH-induced changes is due to increased rejection of grafted B6 parental cells by F1 NK cells, a phenomenon very similar, if not identical, to HR to bone marrow grafts.