There are several major differences between the penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) of highly penicillin-resistant and -susceptible strains of pneumococci. The highest-molecular-size PBP 1a (98 kilodaltons [kDa]) of susceptible pneumococci is not detectable in resistant bacteria. Instead, resistant strains contain a PBP of smaller size: 92 and 94 kDa in South African strains 8249 and A95210, respectively, and 96 kDa in New Guinea strain 2955 (S. Zighelboim and A. Tomasz, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 17:434-442, 1980). Using antibodies prepared against PBP 1a of penicillin-susceptible pneumococci, we demonstrated that these anomalous-sized proteins in the resistant strains are immunologically related to PBP 1a of penicillin-susceptible bacteria. A second difference between the PBP patterns of strain 8249 and the susceptible pneumococci is that the 78-kDa PBP 2b is not detectable by the radioactive penicillin binding assay in the resistant strain. Using antibodies prepared against PBP 2b of susceptible cells, we demonstrated the presence of PBP 2b in membrane preparations from strain 8249 cells. Thus, the poor detection of this PBP appears to be related to its greatly decreased affinity for the antibiotic molecule. We also compared the patterns of penicillin-labeled peptides derived from PBPs of resistant and susceptible cells during partial proteolysis by V8 protease. Several changes were observable in small peptides carrying the beta-lactam binding site generated from the high Mr (PBP 1a-related) binding proteins. In contrast, no differences in the pattern of penicillin-labeled peptides were seen when the pattern of PBP 2a of susceptible pneumococci was compared with the peptide pattern of PBP 2a from resistant strains. One of the resistant isolates (strain 2955) also had a PBP 3 with a higher-than-normal molecular weight. This protein gave strong positive reaction with antibodies against PBP 3 of susceptible cells. Examination of the pattern of penicilloyl peptides generated from the susceptible and resistant PBP 3s during partial proteolysis revealed only differences which seem to reside distant from the beta-lactam binding site.