During 4 hr after puromycin (PUR: 20 micrograms/ml) treatment, the synthesis of three major heat shock protein families (HSPs: Mr = 110,000, 87,000, and 70,000) was enhanced 1.5-fold relative to that of untreated cells, as studied by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The increase of unique HSPs, if studied with two-dimensional gels, would probably be much greater. In parallel, thermotolerance was observed at 10(-3) isosurvival as a thermotolerance ratio (TTR) of either 2 or greater than 5 after heating at either 45.5 degrees C or 43 degrees C, respectively. However, thermotolerance was induced by only intermediate concentrations (3-30 micrograms/ml) of puromycin that inhibited protein synthesis by 15-80%; a high concentration of PUR (100 micrograms/ml) that inhibited protein synthesis by 95% did not induce either HSPs or thermotolerance. Also, thermotolerance was never induced by any concentration (0.01-10 micrograms/ml) of cycloheximide that inhibited protein synthesis by 5-94%. Furthermore, after PUR (20 micrograms/ml) treatment, the addition of cycloheximide (CHM: 10 micrograms/ml), at a concentration that reduces protein synthesis by 94%, inhibited both thermotolerance and synthesis of HSP families. Thus, thermotolerance induced by intermediate concentrations of PUR correlated with an increase in newly synthesized HSP families. This thermotolerance phenomenon was compared with another phenomenon termed heat resistance and observed when cells were heated at 43 degrees C in the presence of CHM or PUR immediately after a 2-hr pretreatment with CHM or PUR. Heat protection increased with inhibition of synthesis of both total protein and HSP families. Moreover, this heat protection decayed rapidly as the interval between pretreatment and heating increased to 1-2 hr, and did not have any obvious relationship to the synthesis of HSP families. Therefore, there are two distinctly different pathways for developing thermal resistance. The first is thermotolerance after intermediate concentrations of PUR treatment, and it requires incubation after treatment and apparently the synthesis of HSP families. The second is resistance to heat after CHM or PUR treatment immediately before and during heating at 43 degrees C, and it apparently does not require synthesis of HSP families. This second pathway not requiring the synthesis of HSP families also was observed by the increase in thermotolerance at 45.5 degrees C caused by heating at 43 degrees C after cells were incubated for 2-4 hr following pretreatment with an intermediate concentration of PUR.