The accumulation of daunomycin in drug-sensitive and multidrug-resistant human KB cells was examined using light microscopy to detect the inherent fluorescence of daunomycin. Intracellular accumulation of fluorescent drug occurred rapidly in parental KB cells and was markedly reduced in several multidrug-resistant mutants. The addition of verapamil, which reverses multidrug resistance, resulted in increased accumulation of daunomycin in resistant cells. In living cells, most of the daunomycin was found in the nucleus, but significant amounts were detected associated with the plasma membrane, in the cytoplasm, in organelles of the Golgi region, and in lysosomes. The nuclear fluorescence was measured using a photometer system, and the loss of daunomycin from the cells was determined under various conditions. When sensitive cells were allowed to accumulate daunomycin for 5 min at 37 degrees C and then placed in medium without the drug, daunomycin remained inside the nuclei for longer than 1 day. When resistant cells were loaded in the presence of verapamil and the verapamil was removed, the resistant cells lost daunomycin with a half-time of about 1 min. The continuous presence of verapamil markedly inhibited the loss of daunomycin from the cells. Similar results were obtained in separate experiments using [3H]daunomycin. Vinblastine, vincristine, and quinidine were also effective in stimulating daunomycin accumulation in multidrug-resistant cells and in preventing the loss of daunomycin from these resistant cells. This effect required half-maximal concentrations of 1-2 microM for verapamil, vinblastine, and quinidine. Ouabain, lanthanum, colchicine, amiloride, probenecid, and 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine had no effect on this process. Quinine was effective at 10 microM and nifedipine was effective at 50 microM. Depletion of cellular adenosine triphosphate levels by preincubation of cells with azide and 2-deoxyglucose partially inhibited daunomycin loss from resistant cells. These single-cell measurements indicate that diminished daunomycin accumulation in multidrug-resistant cells results from accelerated energy-dependent efflux across the plasma membrane, and this efflux is inhibited by verapamil, quinidine, vincristine, and vinblastine.