Anaerobic, agar-dilution, minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 18 antibiotics are given for the numerically important bacterial groups from the human oral cavity. Strains are divided into susceptibility categories using the guidelines for interpretation of MICs suggested by the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. These guidelines are based on data on antibiotic concentrations attainable in serum following various dosage regimens. MICs are also compared with attainable gingival fluid levels where these are known. The highest percentages of strains were susceptible to tetracycline, with 89% of the 139 strains tested susceptible to serum levels and 97% conditionally susceptible to attainable gingival fluid levels. Ninety-eight percent of strains were conditionally susceptible to attainable gingival fluid levels of minocycline, but many strains, including Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, were only moderately susceptible to attainable serum levels of this tetracycline analogue. Carbenicillin was effective against most groups of organisms, with the important exception of A. actinomycetemcomitans, at serum levels attainable with oral formulations of carbenicillin. Only 2% of the total strains tested were resistant to penicillin, while 33% of strains were categorized as moderately susceptible. Clindamycin was active against many strains of Gram-negative bacteria but was not active against A. actinomycetemcomitans, some Bacteroides, Eikenella corrodens, or the anaerobic vibrios. Metronidazole was active against A. actinomycetemcomitans, all five groups of oral Bacteroides tested, and against Capnocytophaga species. Chloramphenicol was active against A. actinomycetemcomitans, but not against most of the other groups of oral organisms. Nearly all groups contained strains non-susceptible to serum levels attainable with the usual doses of erythromycin, spiramycin, vancomycin, kanamycin, neomycin, streptomycin, doxycycline, oxytetracycline, or chlortetracycline; several strains were resistant to maximum attainable serum levels of each of these antibiotics except doxycycline.