Overall results from worldwide clinical studies of ceftazidime in open and comparative trials conducted over a four-year period in North America, Europe, and elsewhere are presented. Data from 3,570 patients treated with ceftazidime in open studies and from 1,340 patients receiving ceftazidime and 1,180 patients receiving other antibiotics in comparative studies are discussed. The comparative antibiotics consisted of aminoglycosides alone in 14.2 percent of patients, aminoglycosides combined with one or two beta-lactams in 43 percent, beta-lactams alone in 34 percent, and other antibiotic combinations in 8.8 percent. In comparative studies, bacterial clearance rates were 80.6 percent for ceftazidime and 72.5 percent for other antibiotics. Clinically, 92.6 percent of the infected sites in ceftazidime-treated patients in open studies were cured or improved, and 91.1 percent were cured or improved in comparative studies; 84.8 percent of the infected sites were cured or improved in patients treated with other antibiotics. Data indicate that ceftazidime monotherapy is as effective as combination antibiotic therapy in the empiric treatment of febrile non-neutropenic patients. The role of ceftazidime monotherapy in the treatment of febrile neutropenic patients is not yet firmly established. Superinfections were reported in 2.6 percent of the patients treated with ceftazidime alone in open trials, in 4.2 percent of the patients treated with ceftazidime alone in comparative trials, and in 8.5 percent of the patients treated with other antibiotics. During treatment, the sensitivity of bacteria to ceftazidime decreased in 2.5 percent of the pathogens isolated. Adverse events occurred in 10.2 percent of patients treated with ceftazidime in open studies, in 8.4 percent of those treated with ceftazidime in comparative studies, and in 8.8 percent of those treated with other antibiotics. The adverse events in both ceftazidime- and control-treated patients were thought by the investigators to be drug-related in about 40 percent of cases, not drug-related in 20 percent of cases, and of unknown etiology in the remaining cases.