Earlier studies suggested that heritable resistance to nalidixic acid (Nal) induced in the asexual, pathogenic yeast Candida albicans by growth on Nal results from mitochondrial mutation. To determine conclusively whether mutations to Nal resistance are cytoplasmic or nuclear, several stable Nal-resistant (Nalr) mutants exhibiting distinctive differences in degrees of Nal resistance were obtained from each of two doubly auxotrophic strains (Ade-, Thr- and Arg-, His-), both derived from the same wild-type stock. Inheritance of Nal resistance was then assessed in a series of protoplast fusion crosses between complementing auxotrophs. The initial, intact cellular products of a fusion cross are prototrophic heterokaryons which frequently assort single parental nuclei into monokaryotic blastospores containing biparental cytoplasms. Occasional karyogamy within heterokaryons also yields prototrophic hybrid monokaryons which can undergo recombinations for chromosomal markers through spontaneous or induced mitotic crossing-over. Segregation and expression of Nal resistance among non-hybrid, parental-type monokaryons from Nalr X Nals heterokaryons showed that Nalr mutations are nuclear and that their expressions are not noticeably affected by admixture of cytoplasms of sensitive and resistant parental strains. Analyses of heterokaryons and hybrid monokaryons from Nalr X Nals and Nalr X Nalr crosses demonstrated that Nal resistance is recessive to sensitivity, and that independent Nalr mutations arise at one gene in the Ade-, Thr- strain and at a separate, complementing single gene in the Arg-, His- strain. Prior work demonstrated that induction of Nalr mutations in wild-type C. albicans depends profoundly on the (i) carbon and nitrogen, (ii) growth temperature, (iii) contact with particular metabolic inhibitors and (iv) division stage of cells during exposure to Nal. The present observations indicate that the character of cellular auxotrophies can determine the genetic loci at which Nalr mutations can be recovered.