Escherichia fergusonii (formerly known as Enteric Group 10) and Enterobacter taylorae (formerly known as Enteric Group 19) are proposed as new species in the family Enterobacteriaceae. By DNA hybridization (32P, 60 degrees C, hydroxyapatite), strains of E. fergusonii were 90 to 97% related to the type strain (holotype) ATCC 35469. They were most closely related to Escherichia coli and more distantly related to species in other genera. E. fergusonii strains are positive for indole production, methyl red, lysine decarboxylase, ornithine decarboxylase, and motility. They ferment D-glucose with gas production and also ferment adonitol, L-arabinose, L-rhamnose, maltose, D-xylose, trehalose, cellobiose, and D-arabitol. They are negative for Voges-Proskauer, citrate utilization (17% positive), urea hydrolysis, phenylalanine deamination, arginine dihydrolase, growth in KCN, and fermentation of lactose, sucrose, myo-inositol, D-sorbitol, raffinose, and alpha-methyl-D-glucoside. By DNA hybridization (32P, 60 degrees C, hydroxyapatite), strains of E. taylorae were 84 to 95% related to the type strain (holotype) ATCC 35317. Their nearest relative was E. cloacae, to which they were 61% related. Other named species were more distantly related. Strains of E. taylorae are positive for Voges-Proskauer, citrate utilization, arginine dihydrolase, ornithine decarboxylase, motility, growth in KCN medium, and malonate utilization. They ferment D-glucose with gas production and also ferment D-mannitol, L-arabinose, L-rhamnose, maltose, D-xylose, trehalose, and cellobiose. They are negative for indole production, methyl red, H2S production on triple sugar-iron agar, urea hydrolysis, phenylalanine deamination, lysine decarboxylase, gelatin hydrolysis, and fermentation of adonitol, i-inositol, D-sorbitol, and raffinose. Both new species occur in human clinical specimens. Two strains of E. fergusonii were isolated from blood. Five stains of E. taylorae were isolated from blood, and one was from spinal fluid. These blood and spinal fluid isolates suggest possible clinical significance, but this point requires further study.