Gentamicin pharmacokinetics and nephrotoxicity have not been widely studied in animals with preexisting renal dysfunction, despite the fact that nephrotoxicity is a continuing manifestation of clinical therapy. The present study contrasted the dose-response nephrotoxicity of gentamicin in control rats with that of rats with renal insufficiency secondary to subtotal (2/3) surgical nephrectomy. Total daily doses ranging from 0 to 120 mg/kg were given in a divided regimen, every 8 hr and doses were reduced by doubling the interval in subtotally nephrectomized (Nx) rats, in proportion to impaired renal elimination on the first day of gentamicin administration. Estimates of renal function, including creatinine clearance, fractional sodium and potassium excretion, and serum creatinine and urea nitrogen, were collected after 6 and 12 days of dosing. In addition, urinary N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase excretion (6 days), in vitro renal cortical slice accumulation of tetraethylammonium (TEA) (6 days), quantified morphological lesions (12 days), and renal gentamicin concentrations (6 days) were examined. Pharmacokinetic data collected immediately after the first dose revealed a reduced gentamicin clearance and slightly reduced volume of distribution, with a corresponding prolonged half-life in the Nx rats. Based on statistical analysis of the dose-response relationships, Nx rats were functionally resistant to gentamicin nephrotoxicity after 6 days of dosing. This resistance was partially reversed by 12 days dosing, despite light-microscopic evidence of greater structural damage in the control rats. Renal parenchymal gentamicin concentrations were lower at some doses in the Nx rats, in contrast to the higher fractional reabsorption found in these rats at all doses. TEA transport was depressed at all doses in control rats but not at the lower doses in Nx rats, indicating that resistance was partially mediated at the level of the proximal tubular epithelium. This study demonstrates altered gentamicin pharmacokinetics and nephrotoxicity in a surgical model of renal dysfunction in rats.