Serologically defined strains of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli from healthy and diarrheic animals were examined for the occurrence of plasmid DNA in association with the antibiotic susceptibility of the bacterial host and the health status of the animal host. Of all campylobacter organisms surveyed, 53% (116 of 200) contained plasmid DNA. A plasmid occurrence rate of 73.8% was obtained for C. coli from healthy pigs, contrasted by lower plasmid occurrence rates for C. coli from diarrheic pigs (30%) and from all diarrheic animals (21.4%). For C. jejuni, in contrast, only 13.6% of healthy cattle contained plasmid DNA, contrasted by a higher plasmid occurrence rate of 31.2% from diarrheic cattle. A high plasmid occurrence rate of 75.8% was observed for C. jejuni from healthy chickens. Campylobacter plasmids ranged in size from less than or equal to 1 to 86 megadaltons. Antibiotic susceptibility for 52 animal isolates (excluding chickens) indicated that most isolates were susceptible to kanamycin, erythromycin, gentamicin, tetracycline, and compound sulfonamide, whereas few were susceptible to bacitracin (19.2%); approximately half were susceptible to ampicillin (55.8%) and streptomycin (51.9%), and no isolates were susceptible to penicillin G. More isolates containing plasmids were resistant to ampicillin, tetracycline, and gentamicin than were isolates not carrying plasmids, there being a statistically significant difference for tetracycline and gentamicin, which suggested that these two antibiotics were probably plasmid mediated. The antibiotic susceptibility patterns of 21 chicken isolates of C. jejuni, by contrast, were different in that most were susceptible to ampicillin in addition to kanamycin, erythromycin, and gentamicin, whereas few wer susceptible to compound sulfonamide, streptomycin, and tetracycline in addition to penicillin G and bacitracin. A 30- or 39-megadalton plasmid, or both, common to many of the chicken isolates was usually associated with tetracycline resistance.