In a comparative study, 47 patients received Timentin, a combination of ticarcillin plus clavulanic acid, or piperacillin to treat serious urinary tract infections. Thirty-nine infections in 38 patients were clinically evaluable (21 in the Timentin-treated group and 18 in the piperacillin-treated group). These included pyelonephritis (10 in the Timentin-treated group and five in the piperacillin-treated group), bladder infections with sepsis (11 in the Timentin-treated group and 11 in the piperacillin-treated group) and bladder infections without fever (two in the piperacillin-treated group). The addition of clavulanic acid to ticarcillin greatly enhanced the susceptibility of five of the 28 evaluable pathogens in the Timentin-treated group (two Escherichia coli isolates, two Staphylococcus aureus isolates, and one Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate). The minimal inhibitory concentrations at which 50 and 90 percent of the bacterial growth was inhibited were 4 and 64 micrograms/ml, respectively, for Timentin, and 4 and 32 micrograms/ml, respectively, for piperacillin. All evaluable patients had a satisfactory symptomatic response at the end of the trial. Of 28 evaluable pathogens treated with Timentin, 18 were eradicated up through the one-week post-therapy evaluation period; of 27 evaluable pathogens treated with piperacillin, 18 were eradicated up through the same time period. Eradicated pathogens included E. coli (six of 13 in the Timentin-treated group and six of 11 in the piperacillin-treated group), other Enterobacteriaceae (three of three in the Timentin-treated group and eight of 10 in the piperacillin-treated group), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (two of four in the piperacillin-treated group), enterococcus (two of three in the Timentin-treated group and two of two in the piperacillin-treated group), staphylococcal species (four of five in the Timentin-treated group), and other organisms (three of four in the Timentin-treated group). Resistance did not develop in any of the persisting pathogens. Adverse effects thought possibly to be related to the study drugs were minimal and included rash in one Timentin-treated patient and diarrhea in another.