The membrane feeding technique (in vitro feeding) used for the rearing of tsetse flies has advantages over the conventional method of feeding the flies on host animals. However, as long as blood remains the sole source of tsetse fly nutrition, the risk remains of blood being contaminated during collection, storage or feeding with bacteria pathogenic to the flies. The resulting high mortality of the tsetse flies endangers the success of this rearing. The experiments described here have shown that Glossina m. morsitans Westw. are more sensitive to Pseudomonas aeruginosa than G. p. palpalis Rob.-Desv. Rearing experiments over several years have confirmed this finding in that the latter species has never been threatened by high bacterial-induced mortality, whereas in 1973-74, due to contamination of the in vitro fed blood, a population of G. m. morsitans was difficult to colonize. The quantity of infected blood intake (14 to 70 mg) had no influence on the survival rate. However, when flies were infected once with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (dilution stage of 10(-3)), the organisms were eliminated after only nine days in living G. p. palpalis, but after 14 days in living G. m. morsitans. Females were infected at different stages of pregnancy but the same bacteria were not isolated in any puparia. Therefore, transmission of the bacteria to larvae growing in the uterus could not be demonstrated. All antibiotics used, to which bacteria isolated from tsetse flies in the laboratory were sensitive, caused a reduction in productivity. Parental females as well as females which emerged from larvae deposited by these flies (= F1-generation) 6 days after the administration of the drug to the pregnant females showed a similar loss in productivity. This corresponds with a degeneration of mesenteric symbionts. The most successful way to cope with bacterial infection in the membrane feeding technique in the rearing of tsetse flies has proved to be prophylactic measures, i.e. sterile membranes, sterile underlying aluminium trays and sterile blood. The methods employed at this laboratory, where up to 20 000 flies are being fed daily through membranes, have prevented dangerous bacterial infections in both species.