1.A single-gene nuclear mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, isolated as oligomycin-resistant, exhibits in vivo cross-resistance to venturicidin and collateral sensitivity to Synthalin. All three compounds are inhibitors of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. Oligomycin resistance and Synthalin sensitivity are recessive, while venturicidin resistance is dominant. 2. Acytoplasmic mutant, also isolated as oligomycin-resistant, shows collateral sensitivity to both Synthalin and venturicidin. All three traits undergo mitotic segregation in diploids formed by crossing mutant and normal halpoids. 3. A novel nucleocytoplasmic interaction is observed in diploids formed by crossing haploid strains containing the nuclear and the cytoplasmic mutations, respectively. The dominant venturicidin resistance determined by the nuclear gene undergoes mitotic segregation, which results from a suppression of the nuclear phenotype by the cytoplasmic mutation. When a diploid mitotic segregant contains primarily mutant-type mitochondria, venturicidin resistance is completely suppressed. In haploids containing both the nuclear and cytoplasmic mutations, suppression is only partial. 4. Oxidative phosphorylation and ATPase in mitochondrial fractions isolated fromcytoplasmic mutant cells are less sensitive to inhibition by oligomycin than normal, but in vitro sensitivity to venturicidin is not significantly changed. In similar mitochondrial fractions isolated from normal and nuclear mutant cells, no significant differences in sensitivity to either inhibitor are detected. 5. The molecular basis for the nucleocytoplasmic suppression of venturicidin resistance may involve participation of mitochondrial membrane, plasma membrane or both. Either mitochondria can undergo changes in venturicidin sensitivity upon isolation, or the molecular entity which controls access of venturicidin to the mitochondria resides outside of the organelles. 6. Our data establish that aspects of the response in vivo of both venturicidin and Snythalin are controlled by the mitochondrial genome. 7. The nucleocytoplasmic interaction described here is the first example in which a specific restricted mitochondrial mutation modifies the phenotypic expression of a nuclear gene.