The development of chemical control of Musca domestica on Danish farms 1945--72 is outlined. It has been strongly influenced by successive development of resistance and failure of control by one insecticide after another. The chlorinated hydrocarbons used as residual sprays failed 1947--51. Organophosphorus compounds (OPC) were widely used from 1953, first as strips impregnated with parathion and residual sprays with diazinon. Resistance to OPC was first found in 1955, diazinon was given up in 1957--59 and parathion strips failed in the early '60's. Trichlorfon paint-on baits were widelyused 1958--64 and serious resistance did not appear until 1967, induced by selective pressure of fenthion and dimethoate used as residual sprays. High resistance to the contact effect of trichlorfon now occurs everywhere in Denmark. However, trichlorfon baits are still able to kill many flies. Residual sprays with fenthion, ronnel and fenitrothion were used to some extent 1960--70, but increased resistance reducing the residual effect developed in 2--3 years. Dimethoate was used on the majority of farms 1965--72. It was very effective the first years and resistance increased slowly until 1971--72, when high to extreme dimethoate-resistance became general on Danish farms. This was associated with high resistance to other OPC for fly control, e.g. fenthion, fenitrothion, bromophos, and tetrachlorvinphos, and to carbamates, with the result that no generally effective residual sprays were available. In 1971--72 frequent treatments with synergized pyrethroids have been tried. However, the method is often expensive, and serious resistance problems have appeared on a few farms. In this situation preventive, sanitary measures to eliminate or reduce fly breeding in manure are becoming decisive again, but difficult to practise due to lack of farm labour. The extreme Danish situation is compared with those in other areas, and probable reasons for differences in resistance and control problems are discussed, as well as possibilities for strategies to reduce resistance development.