Fundamental and clinical evaluation on ceftriaxone (CTRX, Ro 13-9904) was performed in the pediatric field and the following results were obtained. The MIC of CTRX against the recently isolated 10 strains of B. pertussis was less than or equal to 0.05 microgram/ml at inoculum size of 10(6) CFU/ml. The blood level of CTRX after intravenous drip infusion with 10 to 20 mg/kg for 30 minutes to 1 hour reached a peak ranging from 45.3 to 137 micrograms/ml at the end of infusion. The effective blood level was maintained up to 12 hours to be 3.52 to 26.7 micrograms/ml at that time. The half-life time was over 6 hours in most cases, but the multiple intravenous dosage did not cause any elevation of the blood level. The urine excretion rate till 12 to 24 hours after intravenous drip infusion ranged from 58.2 to 84.2%. The excretion of CTRX into the cerebrospinal fluid was favorable in the acute period when administered by intravenous drip infusion in the child with S. pneumoniae purulent meningitis, which was considered to be satisfactory for treatment against the bacteria susceptible to CTRX. The active CTRX was transferred into the feces by the multiple dosage. CTRX was administered by intravenous drip infusion in 26 cases with acute pediatric infections. The clinical efficacy was observed in all the cases with upper/lower respiratory tract infections including bronchopneumonia and pertussis, and the cases with acute urinary tract infections caused by ABPC-resistant E. coli, administered by intravenous drip infusion twice daily with about 40-50 mg/kg/day. The bactericidal efficacy was seen against all bacteria except Salmonella. CTRX by intravenous drip infusion was effective against S. pneumoniae purulent meningitis; the clinical symptom was rapidly improved while the culture of causative strains from the cerebrospinal fluid turned negative. Although CTRX was clinically effective against Salmonella enteritis and typhoid, bacteriological and symptomatological relapses were observed in some cases. An increase in dose of CTRX is considered to be needed for these diseases. No adverse reaction was found clinically but soft stool in 1 case while eosinophilia and thrombocytosis were observed each in 1 out of 30 cases in laboratory test. The efficacy was good or higher in all the 26 cases (100%) administered by intravenous drip infusion. The above-mentioned results indicate that CTRX is useful in the pediatric field.