The human hepatoma cell line, PLC/PRF/5, which is persistently infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV), has integrated HBV-DNA, secretes HBV surface antigen (HBsAg), and does not grow readily in congenitally athymic (nu/nu) mice. The present investigation was undertaken to ascertain whether the low tumorigenicity of this cell line was governed by a host immune response and/or was related to expression of HBsAg. Subcutaneous injection of 4-5 X 10(6) cells into BALB/c nude mice produced localized encapsulated tumors with morphologic features of primary hepatocellular carcinoma in 25% of the animals within 29-40 d. No tumor growth was observed at lower cell inocula. In contrast, SK-HEP-1, an HBV-negative human hepatoma cell line, produced tumors at 1-5 X 10(6) cells inocula in 66% of the animals. Immunosuppression of mice with antilymphocyte serum (ALS) or irradiation increased tumor incidence in mice inoculated with 1 X 10(6) PLC/PRF/5 cells to almost 100% and produced local invasiveness. Immunosuppression also reduced the latency, i.e., time to tumor appearance, and increased mean tumor weight. These results suggest that tumorigenicity was limited by the host immune response. The nature of the response was delineated by treating nude mice challenged with tumor cells with sheep anti-mouse interferon globulin (anti-IFN). When 2 X 10(6) cells were injected, tumor growth occurred in 75% of anti-IFN-treated mice, whereas controls injected with the same number of cells, but not receiving anti-IFN, failed to develop tumors. The tumors in the anti-IFN-treated mice were highly invasive and the latency period until tumor appearance was reduced to 3-5 d. An inverse correlation was found between susceptibility of the hepatoma cells to natural killer (NK) activity in vitro and resistance to tumor growth in vivo. In vitro cytotoxicity for PLC/PRF/5 cells was eliminated by anti-NK 1.1 and complement, establishing the effector cell as an NK cell. NK cell activity 14 d after inoculation of mice with PLC/PRF/5 cells was augmented against PLC/PRF/5 target cells but not against SK-HEP-1 cells. Treatment of mice with ALS, irradiation, or anti-IFN abolished NK activity against PLC/PRF/5 cells. Co-cultivation of nude mouse spleen cells with PLC/PRF/5 but not with HBsAg or SK-HEP-1 cells induced secretion of murine IFNalpha. These results suggest that the IFN/NK cell system may play a role in limiting tumorigenicity and invasiveness of HBV-infected human hepatocellular carcinoma cells by a mechanism similar to that found for other cells persistently infected with viruses.