The effect of various phorbols and phorbol diesters on the NK sensitivity of the human leukemic K562 cells was studied. A marked decrease in K562 cell susceptibility was achieved by culture in the presence of either 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) or beta-phorbol-dibutyrate. The maximum protection against NK lysis was achieved when K562 cells were cultured in the presence of 160 nM TPA for 48 hr (mean percentage inhibition: 61% of specific lysis). As for untreated targets, the residual killing of K562 cells after TPA treatment was mediated through large granular lymphocytes (LGL). The experimental procedures required to achieve maximal NK protection with TPA resulted simultaneously in marked phenotypical changes in K562 cells: erythroid and early myeloid markers decreased, whereas the expression of megakaryocytic markers was increased as shown by staining with antiplatelet monoclonal antibodies and assessment of platelet peroxidase activity. Chemical phorbol analogs which were unable to induce K562 cell differentiation did not affect K562 cell sensitivity to NK lysis. De novo protein synthesis is involved in the TPA-induced NK resistance, since this effect was abolished by pretreatment of K562 cells with actinomycin D or cycloheximide. TPA has been previously demonstrated to reduce NK effector activity. In our data however, the observed TPA effects were not due to release of TPA acting on effector cells during the NK assay since TPA-treated K562 cell supernatants were unable to inhibit NK activity in control assays. Thus, TPA appears to decrease NK killing of malignant cells, both by depressing NK effector cells functions and by reducing the susceptibility to NK lysis of the target cells. In single-cell agarose assays, TPA-treated K562 cells demonstrated reduced NK-binding capacity and reduced sensitivity to lysis after binding. These defects could not be reversed by activation of the NK effector cells with interferon. The results here reported extend the previously suggested relations between the expression of NK-target structures and the differentiation stage of malignant cells.