Cefoperazone disk diffusion test and minimum inhibitory concentration comparison studies were performed on 421 recent bacterial isolates, using 30- and 75-micrograms commercially prepared disks. Acceptable correlation coefficients (-0.82 to -0.86) and very major (false-susceptible) interpretive error rates (less than 1%) were obtained with both disk concentrations. The interpretive criteria for both disks were identical. Using the preferred 75-micrograms disk, the Thornsberry et al. criteria (J. Clin. Microbiol. 15:769-776, 1982) of greater than or equal to 18 mm = susceptible (less than or equal to 32 micrograms/ml) and less than or equal to 14 mm = resistant (greater than 64 micrograms/ml) resulted in only 5.5% of strains having indeterminate-range zone diameters; the 30-micrograms disk had 6.9% of strains with indeterminate zone diameters. The 75-micrograms disk, excluding the testing of enterococci, minimized the very major and other interpretive errors to less than 5%. Larger zone diameters will contribute few technical problems with either disk concentration. Data from 1,320 zone diameters submitted for each quality control strain indicated no significant (P greater than 0.05) difference between disks made by the three major manufacturers, and consistent results were obtained within each laboratory with numerous lots of Mueller-Hinton agar (except for one manufacturer). Individual daily test and accuracy quality control ranges were calculated from clinical investigator laboratory data at 16 hospitals based on mean zone sizes and from an additional 8 laboratories with both mean and median calculations. The quality control data were nearly identical, and ranges calculated by the two methods were very similar. Susceptibility tests of Pseudomonas aeruginosa indicate that the cefoperazone disk or minimum inhibitory concentration test would accurately predict P. aeruginosa susceptibility test results for other pseudomonas-active cephalosporins (cefsulodin and ceftazidime), thus producing no very major interpretive errors.