The therapeutic effects of cefmenoxime (CMX), a new synthetic cephalosporin antibiotic, were examined in the treatment of various pediatric infections. Patients treated were infants and children ranging from one-month-old to 13-year-old suffering from pharyngitis in 2 cases, bronchopneumonia in 3 cases, cervical lymphadenitis in 2 cases, urinary tract infections in 7 cases, tympanitis in 2 cases, suppurative meningitis, sepsis, subcutaneous apostem, acute enteritis, chest wall apostem, phlegmon, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome in 1 case each, a total of 23 cases. As regards method of administration, CMX from a vial was dissolved in physiological saline or distilled water for injection, and the solution was administered by 3 to 5 minutes one short intravenous injection (14 cases), or CMX was diluted with large volume parenteral product and administered by 30 to 60 minutes drip infusion (9 cases). The dosage of the drug was 30 to 200 mg/kg/day; 103 mg/kg/day and under in 21 cases, 150 mg/kg/day and 200 mg/kg/day in 1 case each. The administration was continued for 3 to 27 days. As regards clinical efficacy, "good" or "excellent" results were obtained in all the cases except 2 cases, one was alpha-Streptococcus acute tympanitis supervening neuroblastoma, and the other was Pseudomonas urinary tract infection. The efficacy rate was 91.3% with excellent in 11 cases, good in 10 cases. As regards bacteriological effects, of 13 strains of Gram-positive bacteria, 10 strains were eliminated and 3 strains were not changed, while of 10 strains of Gram-negative bacteria, 8 strains were eliminated and 2 strains were reduced; thus CMX showed better results against Gram-negative bacteria rather than against Gram-positive ones. The antimicrobial activity of CMX against Gram-positive bacteria was inferior to those of CTM and CEZ, but CMX showed the highest antimicrobial activity against Gram-negative bacteria. No clinical side effects nor abnormal laboratory findings obviously attributable to CMX were observed.