Acyclovir (aciclovir) is a nucleoside analogue antiviral drug related to cytarabine, idoxuridine, trifluridine and vidarabine. In common with these earlier antivirals, acyclovir is active against some members of the herpesvirus group of DNA viruses. The efficacy of topical acyclovir has been convincingly demonstrated in ocular herpetic keratitis, and in initial and primary initial genital herpes infection, but little or no clinical benefit was seen when non-primary initial genital infections were assessed separately. Acyclovir ointment demonstrated little benefit in recurrent genital herpes but topical acyclovir cream decreased the course of the infection by 1 to 2 days. Orally and intravenously administered acyclovir were beneficial in initial genital herpes infections, and oral therapy shortened the duration of recurrent infections by 1 to 2 days but did not ameliorate pain. In non-immunocompromised patients with recurrent herpes simplex labialis, generally little clinical benefit was seen with the use of topical acyclovir ointment even when therapy was initiated during the prodromal phase, while topical acyclovir cream effected small but significant improvements in the clinical but not the symptomological course of the disease. However, in immunocompromised patients, both intravenous and topical acyclovir shortened the clinical course of herpes simplex virus infections occurring mainly on the lips, oral mucosa and face, and prophylaxis with either oral or intravenous acyclovir suppressed the appearance of recurrent lesions from latent virus for the period of drug administration, but acyclovir did not eradicate latent herpesviruses. In non-immunocompromised patients, intravenous acyclovir was shown to decrease the acute pain of zoster, especially in the elderly, but postherpetic neuralgia was not ameliorated. When immunocompromised patients were studied, intravenous acyclovir inhibited the progression of zoster infections and shortened the healing time and duration of viral shedding in patients with cutaneous disseminated zoster. However, acute and post-herpetic pain were not significantly affected. Well designed controlled studies are underway to establish the efficacy of acyclovir in herpes simplex encephalitis and cytomegalovirus infections in immunocompromised patients, infections due to Epstein-Barr virus, and neonatal herpesvirus infections. Despite some aspects of the drug's use which require further clarification, acyclovir will make a major impact on the treatment of herpesviral infections. Barring unexpected findings with wider clinical use, it will become the agent of choice in several conditions.