Myxothiazol, an antibiotic from Myxococcus fulvus, which inhibits mitochondrial respiration in the bc1 complex of the respiratory chain, has effects on the redox components of isolated succinate-cytochrome c reductase complex which suggest that it interacts with both cytochrome b and the iron-sulfur protein of the bc1 complex. The inhibitor appears to increase the midpoint potentials of cytochromes b-562 and b-566, as indicated by an increase in their reducibility by the succinate/fumarate couple. It also causes a red shift in the optical spectrum of ferrocytochrome b-566, as reported previously (Becker, W. F., Von Jagow , G., Anke , T., Steglisch , W. (1981) FEBS Lett. 132, 329-333). This red shift is enhanced by Triton X-100, and there is no shift in the spectrum of b-562. These results are consistent with evidence that mutations conferring myxothiazol resistance in yeast map to the mitochondrial gene for cytochrome b ( Thierbach , G., and Michaelis, G. (1982) Mol. Gen. Genet. 186, 501-506). In addition, myxothiazol has effects on reduction of the cytochromes b and c1 by succinate or ubiquinol which are identical to those caused by removal of the iron-sulfur protein from the bc1 complex. It blocks reduction of cytochrome c1 during single and multiple turnovers of the bc1 complex, but does not block reduction of the b cytochromes. In the presence of antimycin, it blocks reduction of both cytochromes b and c1. In contrast to antimycin, myxothiazol inhibits oxidant-induced reduction of both b cytochromes and does not inhibit their oxidation by fumarate. Myxothiazol also inhibits reduction of the iron-sulfur protein by ubiquinol and shifts the gx resonance in the EPR spectrum of the iron-sulfur protein from g = 1.79 to 1.76. It does not affect the midpoint potential of the iron-sulfur protein, but does eliminate the increase in midpoint potential which is caused by inhibitory hydroxyquinones which bind to the iron-sulfur protein. The effects of myxothiazol are consistent with a protonmotive Q cycle pathway of electron transfer in which myxothiazol binds to cytochrome b and displaces quinone from the iron-sulfur protein of the bc1 complex. These results suggest either that a myxothiazol-induced conformational change in cytochrome b is transmitted to a quinone binding site on the iron-sulfur protein, or that there is a quinone binding site which consists of peptide domains from both cytochrome b and iron-sulfur protein.