Dibekacin (DKB) was administered to patients with complicated urinary tract infections without any indwelling catheter to evaluate objectively and comparatively the efficacy, safety and usefulness of intravenous drip infusion once daily and twice daily in a well-controlled study. A 50 mg dose of DKB was administered twice a day to group A, and a 100 mg dose was given once a day to group B. In both groups the drug was given by 1-hr i.v. infusion for 5 consecutive days. Drug efficacy was evaluated in 72 (group A: 36, group B: 36) of the 83 patients treated, and the safety was evaluated on 81 patients (group A: 41, group B: 40). There were no significant differences in the background characteristics between the two groups. The overall clinical efficacy judged by the Committee for Evaluation of Clinical Efficacy was "excellent" in 14% and "moderate" in 50% of group A, and "excellent" in 17% and "moderate" in 64% of group B, the efficacy being higher for group B than group A, but the difference was not statistically significant. The overall drug efficacy rate for each type of infection excluding group 2, was slightly higher in group B, but this difference was not significant either. The overall clinical efficacy for each site of infection, was higher for group B but the differences were not significant. The overall clinical efficacy as judged by the attending physicians was "excellent" in 17% and "moderate" in 58% of group A, and "excellent" in 25% and "moderate" in 61% of group B. The intergroup difference was thus smaller than that judged by the Committee. The elimination rates against bacteriuria were 58% for both groups A and B, and the decrease rates including "cleared" were 42% against pyuria for both groups A and B. Bacteriological evaluation, showed that there was no significant difference in the eradication rates, between group A (65%) and group B (70%). But the eradication rate for gram-positive bacteria was 40% in group A and 81% in group B, there being a significant difference (P less than 0.05) between them. The evaluation of usefulness gave 44% and 53% "satisfactory" rates, respectively, for groups A and B. The results for the "average score" were also the same in both groups. There were no side effects in any of the 81 patients examined. Abnormal laboratory test values attributed to the drug were seen only in 3 and 2 patients in groups A and B, respectively, there being no difference between the groups.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)