In vitro activities of antimicrobial agents against causative organisms isolated from patients with urinary tract infections were investigated by dilution method using MIC 2000 (Dynatec) during July to October in 1982. The summarized results are as follows: PMPC and CCL have showed potent activities against E coli among the oral antimicrobial agents. PMPC and CCL at 3.13 micrograms/ml inhibited 90% of E. coli tested. CTM, CTX, CZX, CMX and LMOX at concentrations of 0.39 microgram/ml or less among the parenteral antimicrobial agents inhibited 90% of E. coli tested. The value of MIC90 (concentration at which 90% of isolates are inhibited) against K. pneumoniae results in the resistant range for ABPC, NA, CEX, CCL and ST. Among the parenteral cephems, CMX seemed most effective against K. pneumoniae tested. C. freundii seemed generally low susceptible to antimicrobial agents tested. Among the oral agents, PMPC, PPA and ST have showed moderate activity against C. freundii. Among the parenteral agents, CMX and LMOX also showed moderate activity against C. freundii, inhibiting 50% of the strains tested at 6.25 micrograms/ml. Among the oral agents, PMPC showed the most potent activity against E. cloacae. E. cloacae tested were highly resistant to the first and second generation cephems. Among the third generation, CMX seemed the most potent activity against E. cloacae isolated. However, CMX concentration of 1.56 micrograms/ml was necessary to inhibit 50% of tested E. cloacae. P. mirabilis tested was resistant to all oral antimicrobial agents except CCL and ST. The value of MIC90 of the first and second generation cephems against P. mirabilis results in the moderately susceptible range (6.25-25 micrograms/ml). The third generation seemed most effective against P. mirabilis tested. PMPC, NA, PPA and ST concentrations of 0.78-1.56 micrograms/ml were necessary to inhibit 50% of tested P. vulgaris. CEZ and CTM, seemed less potent activity than CFX and CMZ against P. vulgaris. CTX, CZX, CMX and LMOX except CPZ have showed potent activities against P. vulgaris, these at 0.1 micrograms/ml or less inhibited 50% of P. vulgaris tested. P. aeruginosa has been resistant to the third generation cephems except CPZ, but TOB, GM, AMK, CFS, PIPC and CPZ have showed high activities against P. aeruginosa, inhibiting 50% of the strains tested at 0.39-6.25 micrograms/ml. The oral antimicrobial agents, and first and second generation cephems had not showed significant activity against S. marcescens. And strains of S. marcescens were relatively susceptible to the third generation cephems.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)