Syrian hamster cell lines selected in multiple steps for resistance to high levels of N-(phosphonacetyl)-L-aspartate (PALA) contain many copies of the gene coding for the pyrimidine pathway enzyme CAD. Approximately 500 kilobases of additional DNA was coamplified with each copy of the CAD gene in several cell lines. To investigate its structure and organization, we cloned ca. 162 kilobases of coamplified DNA from cell line 165-28 and ca. 68 kilobases from cell line B5-4, using a screening method based solely on the greater abundance of amplified sequences in the resistant cells. Individual cloned fragments were then used to probe Southern transfers of genomic DNA from 12 different PALA-resistant mutants and the wild-type parents. A contiguous region of DNA ca. 44 kilobases long which included the CAD gene was amplified in all 12 mutants. However, the fragments cloned from 165-28 which were external to this region were not amplified in any other mutant, and the external fragments cloned from B5-4 were not amplified in two of the mutants. These results suggest that movement or major rearrangement of DNA may have accompanied some of the amplification events. We also found that different fragments were amplified to different degrees within a single mutant cell line. We conclude that the amplified DNA was not comprised of identical, tandemly arranged units. Its structure was much more complex and was different in different mutants. Several restriction fragments containing amplified sequences were found only in the DNA of the mutant cell line from which they were isolated and were not detected in DNA from wild-type cells or from any other mutant cells. These fragments contained novel joints created by rearrangement of the DNA during amplification. The cloned novel fragments hybridized only to normal fragments in every cell line examined, except for the line from which each novel fragment was isolated or the parental population for that line. This result argues that "hot spots" for forming novel joints are rare or nonexistent.