JEG-3 is a human choriocarcinoma cell line characterized by low levels of adenosine deaminase expression. For the purpose of studying adenosine deaminase gene regulation in the JEG-3 cells, we attempted to select variant cells having increased adenosine deaminase expression. This was accomplished by selecting cells for resistance to the cytotoxic adenosine analogs 9-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl adenine (ara-A) or 9-beta-D-xylofuranosyl adenine (xyl-A), both of which could presumably be detoxified by the action of adenosine deaminase. Single step high dose selection was ineffective in obtaining cells with increased adenosine deaminase. However, multistep selection using either ara-A or xyl-A resulted in cell populations with increased adenosine deaminase activity. Removal of selective pressure resulted in decreased adenosine deaminase levels. Subclones of xyl-A-resistant cells belonged to one of three phenotypic classes characterized by either elevated adenosine deaminase levels, decreased adenosine kinase levels, or both of these features. One subclone (A3-1A7) with unaltered adenosine kinase expression showed a 20-fold increase in adenosine deaminase expression. Further selection of this subclone for increasing xyl-A resistance resulted in an additional 2-fold increase in adenosine deaminase expression, followed by loss of adenosine kinase expression. These adenosine kinase-deficient cells showed no subsequent increase in adenosine deaminase expression in response to further xyl-A selection pressure. These results confirmed that xyl-A toxicity was mediated through its phosphorylated form and indicated that resistance may result from increased adenosine deaminase levels and/or adenosine kinase deficiency. The increased adenosine deaminase expression of the A3-1A7 subclone was exclusively in the ADA 2 allelic form. However, cell fusion experiments between A3-1A7 cells and mouse C1-1D cells established the existence of functional copies of both ADA 1 and ADA 2 allelic genes in the A3-1A7 cells. The increased expression of only one of the two functional ADA alleles, the requirement for a stepwise selection protocol to obtain cells with increased adenosine deaminase, and the instability of the adenosine deaminase phenotype in the absence of selective pressure suggest that the alteration of adenosine deaminase phenotype in the drug-resistant cells was the result of adenosine deaminase gene amplification.