Stable anaerobic resistance of Tritrichomonas foetus to metronidazole was induced in vitro by cultivation of trichomonads in the Diamond's TYM medium with metronidazole in concentrations sublethal to the parasites. Nine metronidazole-resistant strains were derived from four drug-susceptible clones of the T. foetus strain KV-1. Subculturing the parasites at both increasing and constant pressure of the drug resulted in development of resistance if the medium contained at least 3 micrograms ml-1 of metronidazole and the organisms were exposed to the drug for 3 to 8 months. The development of resistance was gradual and in all clones investigated proceeded through similar sequence of stages: (1) Survival without growth and subsequent reproduction at low metronidazole concentrations (1 to 5 micrograms ml-1). (2) Survival and reproduction at moderate concentrations of the drug (10 to 15 micrograms ml-1). (3) Resistance to 100 micrograms ml-1 metronidazole, unstable in absence of selective pressure of the drug. (4) Resistance to high concentrations of metronidazole, stable when the organisms were maintained under nonselective conditions. The trichomonads with fully developed resistance were able to grow in anaerobic culture at 100 micrograms ml-1 metronidazole and could be maintained indefinitely under these conditions. The minimal lethal concentrations for metronidazole obtained with these strains in an anaerobic in vitro assay were, at 48 h, 500 to 1000 micrograms ml-1. This is 100 to 400 times higher than those obtained with the parent clones. The fully developed resistance was stable in organisms maintained in the absence of the drug over 2 years. The substrains with unstable resistance regained the susceptibility to high concentrations of metronidazole after 80 to 100 transfers in drug-free media. These strains, however, retained their resistance to moderate doses of metronidazole and full resistance could be restored by subculture in the presence of 10 micrograms ml-1 metronidazole.