Ledakrin and seven other antitumor and cytotoxic derivatives of 1-nitro-9-aminoacridine were shown to induce DNA-single strand breaks in HeLa S3 cells as found by alkaline sucrose gradient centrifugation. The induced DNA damage is of non-random character. Some of Ledakrin -induced DNA breaks are probably generated by endonucleolytic cleavage in the course of repair processes as indicated by experiments with Novobiocin, an antibiotic preventing the incision step of DNA repair. Other Ledakrin -induced DNA breaks observed on alkaline sucrose gradients may arise from alkali-labile sites in DNA. Most of such sites seem to be converted to breaks after brief exposure to alkali. The extent of DNA damage by 1-nitro-9-aminoacridines was found to be correlated with cytotoxic activities of these compounds against HeLa S3 cells. Furthermore, Ledakrin and other derivatives seem to induce DNA-repair synthesis in HeLa S3 cells as judged by the stimulation of hydroxyurea (HU)-resistant incorporation of [3H] thymidine into DNA. The agents studied differ in their concentrations required to produce a considerable stimulation of DNA repair, whereas the maximal level of this effect is similar for all the derivatives assayed. The former values are correlated with cytotoxic activities of these compounds and seem to reflect the overall extent of DNA damage by 1-nitro-9-aminoacridines. Stimulation of DNA-repair synthesis is gradually shut off during prolonged incubation of the cells with Ledakrin or during postincubation of the cells in a drug-free medium. Such postincubation results also in the gradual accumulation of DNA-single strand breaks as observed by alkaline sucrose centrifugation. Hence, HeLa S3 cells are incapable of efficiently removing DNA damage by 1-nitro-9-aminoacridines, though the drug's action activates temporarily some repair mechanisms. The reported results suggest that overall DNA damage may contribute to the cytotoxic effects of 1-nitro-9-aminoacridines besides previously found ability of these agents to form interstrand DNA cross-links.