A Na/Ca exchange system has been described in the plasma membrane of several tissues and seems to regulate the concentration of calcium in cytosol. Replacement of extracellular Na by sucrose increases calcium uptake into and decreases calcium efflux from the cell, leading to an increase in cytosolic calcium. The effect of an increase in cytosolic calcium mediated by the Na/Ca exchange system on H+ and Na transport in the turtle and toad bladder was investigated by replacing serosal Na isosmotically by sucrose or choline. Replacement of serosal by sucrose was associated with a significant inhibition of H+ secretion or Na transport which was reversible by addition of NaCl. Replacement of mucosal Na by sucrose failed to alter H+ secretion. Removal of serosal Na was associated with a significant increase in 45Ca uptake which could be blocked by pretreatment with lanthanum chloride. Pretreatment with lanthanum chloride blunted the inhibitory effect of replacement of serosal Na by sucrose on H+ and Na transport, thus suggesting that the increase in calcium uptake and the inhibition of transport are causally related. Under anaerobic conditions the rate of H+ or Na transport are linked to the rate of lactate production. The inhibition of Na or H+ transport by removal of serosal Na was accompanied by a proportional decrease in lactate production, thus suggesting that an increase in cytosolic calcium does not inhibit transport by uncoupling glycolysis from transport. Replacement of serosal Na by sucrose did not alter the force of the H+ or Na pump but led to an increase in resistance of the active pathway of H+ and Na transport. The inhibition of Na transport by replacement of serosal Na with sucrose could be reversed by addition of amphotericin B, an agent which increases luminal permeability to Na, thus suggesting that decreased Na entry across the apical membrane is the mechanism responsible for the inhibition of Na transport. The results of the present studies strongly suggest that an increase in cytosolic calcium through the serosal Na/Ca exchange system inhibits H+ and Na transport in the turtle and toad bladder probably by increasing the resistance of the luminal membrane.