In a preceding paper the genetics of resistance of 2 representative strains exhibiting resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics (ampicillin, catbenicillin, cephalothin) to aminoglycosides (kanamycin, neomycin, paromomycin, gentamycin, sisomycin, tobramycin, streptomycin, spectinomycin) and further antimicrobials (tetracycline, chloramphenicol, suphonamides) were described. This paper reports about the mechanism of resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics and aminoglycosides in these strains. Enzymatic extracts from K. pneumoniae 1 and Serratia marcescens 2 were produced by the osmotic shock procedure. Incubation of these extracts with aminoglycoside antibiotics, to which the strains are resistant, and ATP resulted in the total inactivation of the antimicrobials, as measured with a Bacillus subtilis assay. Analysis of this inactivation with the radioactive methods of Davies and his colleagues revealed that the kanamycins, neomycins, paromomycin and gentamycin A were phosphorylated. Because butirosin was not a substrate for the phosphorylating enzyme, it was concluded that the strain produced the neomycin/kanamycin phosphototransferase I. Furthermore, it was found that streptomycin and spectinomycin were adenylylated by the enzymatic extracts as well as gentamycin C1a, C1, C2, A, tobramycin, sisomycin and the kanamycins. This substrate profile indicated the presence of two adenylylating enzymes: streptomycin/spectinomycin-adenylyl-transferase and gentamycin-adenylyltransferase. After transfer of multiple drug resistance by conjugation from both strains into C. coli K-12, sonified extracts were prepared and examined for enzymatic activity splitting beta-lactam antibiotics. The relative rates of inactivation of benzylpenicillin, ampicillin and cephaloridine as well as the inhibitory effect of cloxacillin, but not of p-chloro-mercuri-benzoate on the inactivation of cephaloridine indicated that both strains produced a class III/type a (TEM type) beta-lactamase. It is discussed that the increasing frequency of gram-negative organisms form the university hospital with identical resistant phenotypes as the strains examined is the result of the spread of an R-factor among the hospital bacterial flora.