The biochemical basis of suppression of a temperature-sensitive alanyl-tRNA synthetase (alaS) mutation by mutational alterations of the ribosome has been investigated. Measurement of the polyU-dependent polyphenylalanine synthesis showed that ribosomes from the suppressor strains are less active than ribosomes from the unsuppressed aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase mutant. In this system no increased translational ambiguity could be detected for the suppressor ribosomes. This fact and also the findings that the ram-1 mutation is not able to suppress the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase mutation and that presence of the suppressor allele is not accompanied by a measureably improved alanyl-tRNA synthetase activity argue against the possibility that suppression might be due to increased translational misreading rates of the alanyl-tRNA synthetase mRNA. It has been further found that partial suppression of temperature sensitive growth of the alaS mutation can be achieved by independent ribosomal mutations leading to reduced growth rates because of a mutation to antibiotic resistance. Addition of low concentrations of a variety of antibiotics acting at the ribosomal level can also partially revert the temperature-sensitive phenotype of the alaS mutant. Although the possibility cannot be excluded that suppression is due to the stabilisation or activation of the mutant enzyme by some indirect effect of the suppressor ribosomal mutations, the following working hypothesis is favoured at the moment: It is assumed that limitation of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase activity in a certain range of the restrictive temperature causes growth inhibition by the premature termination of polypeptide synthesis at the ribosome or by the unbalanced synthesis of the individual cellular proteins under this condition. The mechanism of suppression by ribosomal mutations is proposed to consist of the release of this growth inhibition by the reduction of the rate of polypeptide synthesis, which would keep amino acid incorporation from exceeding the slow charging of tRNA and thus exhausting the pool of charged tRNA. In the suppressor strains, therefore, growth at the semi-restrictive temperature is no longer limited by the aminoacylation of tRNA but by the translational process at the mutated ribosome. This influence of the ribosomal mutation on the speed of translation could be directly or indirectly coupled with an effect on translational fidelity resulting in the prevention of the binding of uncharged or non-cognate charged tRNA or in the tighter binding of peptidyl-tRNA when cognate aminoacyl-tRNA is limiting.