The relationship between the selective abilities of bacteria to adhere and their predilections for colonizing different mammalian hosts was investigated by using bacteria indigenous to the tongue dorsum of humans and rats as models. Streptococcus salivarius and S. sanguis averaged 22.6 and 2.8%, respectively, of the cultivable bacteria recovered from swab samples of the tonges of five humans, but these organisms were not indigenous on the tongues of rats (Charles River strain). S. faecalis and serum-requiring diphtheroids were consistently prominant on the tongues of rats, but they were not detected on the tongues of the humans examined. The ability of these organisms to adhere to the tongue surface of the hosts was compared by introducing mixtures of streptomycin-resistant strains into the mouths of human volunteers and rats. S. salivarius adhered in higher proportions to the dorsal tongue surface of humans than did strains of S. faecalis and the serum-requiring diphtheroid. S. sanguis also adhered to human tongues better than the serum-requiring diphtheroid. However, S. faecalis and the serum-requiring diphtheroid sorbed in higher proportions to the tongues of rats. In an in vivo assay, human strains of S. pyogenes and S. salivarius attached in higher numbers to buccal epithelial cells derived from humans than to those obtained from rats, whereas the reverse was observed with a serum-requiring diphtheroid derived from rats. Collectively, these studies show that bacteria sorb with a high degree of specificity to the tissues of different mammalian hosts, and the relative adherence of the organisms studied correlated with their natural host tropisms. The selective adherence of S. salvarius and S. faecalis was similar to the tongues of conventional and germ-free rats, suggesting that the presence of an indigenous bacterial flora did not significantly influence their attachment selectivity. Moreover, the ability of these organisms to colonize the tongues of gnotobiotic rats lacking an indigenous flora paralleled their adherence selectivity. Direct scanning microscopic observations indicated that the tongue dorsum of conventional rats is highly papillated but contains relatively sparse bacterial populations. Indigenous organisms colonized the bases of papillae on the anterior tip and lateral edges of the tongue as discrete microcolonies, but bacteria were rarely observed on other papillae. This localized and restricted pattern of colonization and the spatial distribution of the microcolonies of indigenous bacteria present also suggest that antagonistic interactions are unlikely to account for the bacterial tropisms observed for colonization of the tongues of rats.