We demonstrated that administration of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) to pregnant rats conferred partial resistance in their offspring to further challenge with Trypanosoma cruzi. Because of the effects of IFN-gamma on macrophage activation and immunoglobulin isotype selection, offspring were now studied to ascertain whether this intervention modifies the in vitro replication of T. cruzi and nitric oxide (NO) production by peritoneal macrophages (PE), together with the anti-T. cruzi IgG isotypes. To evaluate the possibility of a detrimental effect of IFN-gamma, serum levels of anti-sulphatide autoantibodies were also investigated. Offspring were born to mothers undergoing one of the following procedures during gestation: treatment with recombinant rat IFN-gamma, 50,000 IU/rat, five times/week for 3 weeks, which was started on the day of mating; infection with 10(6) trypomastigotes of T. cruzi at 7, 14, and 21 days after mating plus IFN-gamma treatment as given to the former group; the same protocol except that physiological saline was injected instead of IFN-gamma; injection of physiological saline only. Offspring were challenged at weaning with a similar dose of T. cruzi, to constitute four groups of infected young, plus an additional group of age-matched uninfected rats born to control mothers. PE were harvested at day 7 postinfection (pi), exposed to parasites and further investigated for the replication of T. cruzi and NO production, whereas ELISA studies for measuring serum anti-T. cruzi IgG subclasses and anti-sulphatide autoantibodies were performed at day 30 pi. The number of intracellular parasites in PE was markedly decreased in young born to IFN-gamma-treated mothers, this not being accompanied by higher nitrite levels in culture supernatants. Offspring delivered by IFN-gamma-treated mothers showed no higher serum concentrations of anti-sulphatide autoantibodies, but exhibited a preferential synthesis of anti-T. cruzi IgG2b antibodies. This rat isotype is known to fix complement and constitutes the rat counterpart of IgG2a mouse immunoglobulins whose synthesis is favoured by IFN-gamma.