Isepamicin is an aminoglycoside antibacterial with properties similar to those of amikacin, but with better activity against strains producing type I 6'-acetyltransferase. The antibacterial spectrum includes Enterobacteriaceae and staphylococci. Anaerobes, Neisseriaceae and streptococci are resistant. The lower and upper break-points are 8 and 16 mg/L. Like other aminoglycosides, isepamicin exhibits a strong concentration-dependent bactericidal effect, a long post-antibiotic effect (several hours) and induces adaptive resistance. Isepamicin is administered intravenously or intramuscularly at a dosage of 15 mg/kg once daily or 7.5 mg/kg twice daily. Isepamicin is not bound to plasma proteins, and it distributes in extracellular fluids and into some cells (outer hair cells, kidney cortex) by active transport. Isepamicin is not metabolised and is eliminated solely via the renal route with an elimination half-life (t 1/2 beta) of 2 to 3 hours in adults with normal renal function. The clearance of isepamicin is reduced in neonates, and 7.5 mg/kg once daily is recommended in children <16 days old. Clearance is also reduced in the elderly, but no dosage adjustment is required. In patients with chronic renal impairment, isepamicin clearance is proportional to creatinine clearance (CLCR); the recommended regimen is 8 mg/kg with an administration interval of 24 hours in moderate impairment, 48 hours in severe impairment, 72 hours for CL(CR) 0.6 to 1.14 L/h (10 to 19 ml/min) and 96 hours for CL(CR) 0.36 to 0.54 L/h (6 to 9 ml/min). In end-stage renal failure, isepamicin is eliminated by haemodialysis, but the administration interval should be determined by monitoring the plasma concentration. Compared with healthy volunteers, patients in the intensive care unit or with neutropenic cancer have an increased volume of distribution and a lower clearance, but the 15 mg/kg once daily regimen remains adequate. Isepamicin kinetics are linear in the range 7.5 to 25 mg/kg, so that dosage adjustments, if necessary, are straightforward. Isepamicin can induce nephro-, vestibulo- and oto-toxicity. However, animal and clinical studies show that isepamicin is one of the less toxic aminoglycosides. The usefulness of maintaining serum aminoglycoside concentrations within a therapeutic range remains controversial. With isepamicin, it is proposed to achieve a 1-hour concentration (30 minutes after a 30-minute infusion) >40 mg/L to maximise bactericidal efficacy, and a 'trough' concentration (at the end of the administration interval) <5 mg/L to minimise toxicity. These thresholds should be modified on an individual basis, considering covariates such as concomitant treatment, underlying disease, nature of bacterial strain and site of infection.