The Wider system is a newly developed computer-assisted image-processing device for both bacterial identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. It has been adapted to be able to read and interpret commercial MicroScan panels. Two hundred forty-four fresh consecutive clinical isolates (138 isolates of the family Enterobacteriaceae, 25 nonfermentative gram-negative rods [NFGNRs], and 81 gram-positive cocci) were tested. In addition, 100 enterobacterial strains with known beta-lactam resistance mechanisms (22 strains with chromosomal AmpC beta-lactamase, 8 strains with chromosomal class A beta-lactamase, 21 broad-spectrum and IRT beta-lactamase-producing strains, 41 extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing strains, and 8 permeability mutants) were tested. API galleries and National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) microdilution methods were used as reference methods. The Wider system correctly identified 97.5% of the clinical isolates at the species level. Overall essential agreement (+/-1 log(2) dilution for 3,719 organism-antimicrobial drug combinations) was 95.6% (isolates of the family Enterobacteriaceae, 96.6%; NFGNRs, 88.0%; gram-positive cocci, 95.6%). The lowest essential agreement was observed with Enterobacteriaceae versus imipenem (84.0%), NFGNR versus piperacillin (88.0%) and cefepime (88.0%), and gram-positive isolates versus penicillin (80.4%). The category error rate (NCCLS criteria) was 4.2% (2.0% very major errors, 0.6% major errors, and 1. 5% minor errors). Essential agreement and interpretive error rates for eight beta-lactam antibiotics against isolates of the family Enterobacteriaceae with known beta-lactam resistance mechanisms were 94.8 and 5.4%, respectively. Interestingly, the very major error rate was only 0.8%. Minor errors (3.6%) were mainly observed with amoxicillin-clavulanate and cefepime against extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing isolates. The Wider system is a new reliable tool which applies the image-processing technology to the reading of commercial trays for both bacterial identification and susceptibility testing.