The emergence of resistance to various antibiotics in pneumococci leaves the glycopeptides as the only antibiotics against which pneumococci have no resistance mechanism. This situation has led to a renewed interest in the use of glycopeptides. It has not yet been possible to conclude which one or more of the pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) parameters are the most important and best predictors for the effects of treatment with glycopeptides in animal models or in humans. We used the mouse peritonitis model with immunocompetent mice and with Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae as infective organisms. A wide spectrum of different treatment regimens with vancomycin and teicoplanin was tested to study the pharmacodynamics of these drugs. In studies in which the single dose that protected 50% of lethally infected mice (ED(50)) was given as one dose or was divided into two doses, survival was significantly decreased when the dose was divided. The only statistically significant correlations between the percentage of survival of the mice after 6 days and each of the PK/PD parameters were for peak concentration (C(max))/MIC and S. aureus and for the free fraction of C(max) (C(max-free))/MIC and S. pneumoniae. For S. pneumoniae, the ED(50) for different dosing regimens increased with the number of doses given; e.g., the single-dose ED(50)s for vancomycin and teicoplanin were 0.65 and 0. 45 mg/kg, respectively, but the ED(50)s for dosing regimens with 2-h doses given for 48 h were 6.79 and 5.67 mg/kg, respectively. In experiments with 39 different vancomycin dosing regimens and 40 different teicoplanin dosing regimens against S. pneumoniae, the different PK/PD parameters were analyzed using logistic regression. The C(max-free)/MIC was one of two parameters that best explained the effect for both drugs; for vancomycin, the other important parameter was the AUC/MIC, and for teicoplanin, the other parameter was the time the free fraction of the drug is above the MIC. The effect analyzed as a function of C(max-free)/MIC disclosed thresholds with shifts from almost no effect to full effect at ratios of five to six for vancomycin and two to three for teicoplanin.