BACKGROUND: Fetal cardiac bypass results in dysfunction of the fetoplacental unit (FPU) characterized by increased placental vascular resistance and respiratory acidosis. However the mechanisms of this dysfunction are not completely understood. To test the hypothesis that complement activation and neutrophil degranulation may contribute to the placental dysfunction associated with fetal bypass, we compared placental hemodynamics, complement activation, and neutrophil degranulation among fetuses exposed to cardiac bypass with a miniaturized bypass circuit including an in-line axial flow pump (Hemopump), fetuses undergoing bypass with a conventional roller pump circuit, and control fetuses that were similarly exposed but did not undergo bypass. METHODS: Twenty-six Western Cross sheep fetuses (median 122 days gestation) were randomly assigned to undergo cardiac bypass for 30 minutes with the Hemopump circuit (n = 8), to undergo bypass for 30 minutes with the conventional (roller pump) circuit (n = 10), or to undergo identical exposure and cannulation but not bypass (n = 8, controls). Blood samples were collected to measure white cell count and differential, and C3a and lactoferrin levels prior to bypass, at the end of bypass, and 1 and 2 hours after bypass. Hemodynamics and blood gases were also monitored. RESULTS: There was a fall in white cell count over time that continued after bypass in all groups; neutrophils and lymphocytes were affected similarly. C3a levels rose significantly from prebypass to postbypass in the roller pump group (p<0.0001) but not in either of the other groups. Lactoferrin levels rose significantly from start of bypass in both bypass groups (Hemopump p = 0.01; roller pump p<0.0001) but not in controls. The elevation in lactoferrin level coincided with worsening placental gas exchange and deteriorating cardiac function. CONCLUSIONS: Complement and neutrophil activation occurred with fetal cardiac bypass but only neutrophil activation mirrored the FPU and cardiac dysfunction, suggesting that products of neutrophil activation may be important contributing factors. Improved FPU function with a bypass circuit that has less extracorporeal surface and does not require a large priming volume may be due in part to a reduction in the magnitude of this inflammatory response.