Intermittent courses of melphalan and prednisone is still the standard chemotherapy for the initial treatment of multiple myeloma (MM) in patients who cannot undergo high-dose chemotherapy/radiotherapy with either allogeneic or autologous stem cell transplantation. However, the absorption of the drug from the gastrointestinal tract is highly variable from patient to patient and therefore, different plasma levels of the drug are reached in the blood of individual MM patients. In order to overcome this limitation we decided to use intermediate dose (15-30 mg/m2, day 1) intravenous melphalan in resistant or relapsing MM patients as well as in untreated patients not eligible for a more aggressive protocol. Moreover, considering the good results obtained by other investigators using dexamethasone alone or associated with interferon in the treatment of resistant or relapsing MM patients, dexamethasone (40 mg total dose, day 1) and the lymphoblastoid alpha interferon (3 MU, 3 times a week x 3 weeks, from day 8 to day 26 of each course) were added to intravenous melphalan. Courses were repeated every 5 weeks for a total of 6 cycles. We treated 62 MM patients obtaining a response (defined as reduction > 25% of the initial monoclonal component value associated with disappearance of the clinical symptoms) in 38 out 62 evaluable patients (61%) and stable disease (defined as a decrease of < 25% in the base-line serum monoclonal component level with disappearance of all symptoms present at diagnosis) in 9 (14.5%) more patients. The overall median response duration was 14 months and the overall median survival duration (from the time of inclusion in this protocol) for the 62 patients entered into the study was 34 months. No severe (Grade 3-4 of the WHO) hematological as well as non hematological toxicities were observed. This lack of severe toxicity allowed us to administer the drugs on an outpatient basis. In conclusion, the overall response and the low grade of toxicity in this category of patients are encouraging and suggest that this protocol is both effective and safe treatment for high risk MM patients.