A novel method for the detection of any alteration within a defined sequence has recently been demonstrated (A. Lishanski, N. Kurn, and E. F. Ullman, Nucleic Acids Res. 28:E42, 2000; A. Lishanski, Clin. Chem. 46:9, 2000). Essential to this method are the generation of partial duplexes that are capable of forming four-stranded structures and the ability to detect inhibition of branch migration in these structures (I. G. Panyutin and P. Hsieh, J. Mol. Biol. 230:413-424, 1993). Inhibition of branch migration indicates the presence of sequence alteration. This mutation detection method, termed branch migration inhibition (BMI), is suitable for the detection of drug resistance in M. tuberculosis, which is frequently associated with multiple mutations within known genes. We describe the genotypic determination of the rifampin (RMP) and pyrazinamide (PZA) susceptibilities of M. tuberculosis isolates, using BMI coupled with the luminescence oxygen channeling immunoassay (LOCI) (E. F. Ullman et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:5426-5430, 1994). RMP and PZA resistances are associated with multiple mutations within the rpoB and pncA genes, respectively. M. tuberculosis genomic DNA samples prepared from 46 clinical isolates were used for genotypic determination of RMP resistance in a "blind study." Similarly, PZA resistance was determined using genomic DNA samples prepared from 37 clinical isolates. Full agreement of the genotypic and phenotypic determinations of drug susceptibility was demonstrated. RMP susceptibility determination directly from cells of 10 clinical isolates grown in culture was also demonstrated. The genotypic result of only 1 out of 10 isolates did not agree with the phenotypic susceptibility testing result. Sequence analysis of the rpoB gene of this clinical isolate revealed a single base substitution, most likely a silent point mutation. The new BMI-LOCI mutation detection method is a rapid and accurate procedure for the genotypic determination of the RMP and PZA susceptibilities of M. tuberculosis clinical isolates. BMI can also be detected by using commercially available automated enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay plate formats (Lishanski et al., Nucleic Acids Res. 28:E42, 2000).