OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study, conducted in the French Military hospitals, was to monitor the course of the antimicrobial sensibility of bacteria isolated from nosocomial infection in intensive care units. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A prospective study has been conducted from January to December 1998 in all the intensive care units of the French Army. All the non-repetitive strains isolated from nosocomial infection were collected and sent to a reference centre. Antimicrobial susceptibility was determined by the agar dilution method. Beta-lactamase were identified by iso-electro-focalisation. Antibiotics choice and interpretative criteria were those of the "Comite Francais de l'Antibiogramme de la Societe Francaise de Microbiologie". RESULTS: A total of 849 strains are included in this study. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was the most frequently isolated bacterium (20%) followed by Escherichia coli (19%) Staphylococcus aureus (15%), coagulase-negative Staphylococci (CoNS) (11%) and Enterococci (7%). Imipenem was the most effective antibiotic against enterobacteriaceae (336 isolates; 100% susceptibility). Gentamicin (92%), amikacin (92%) third generation cephalosporins (83%), aztreonam (83%) and ciprofloxacin (78%) were also very effective. Resistance to III generation cephalosporins was correlated with an extended spectrum beta-lactamase (BLSE) in 36% of cases. This BLSE could be associated with an over production of the constitutive cephalosporinase. The most frequent species producing BLSE were Enterobacter aerogenes (75% of BLSE) and Klebsiella pneumoniae (17%). Among the 172 P. aeruginosa isolated, antimicrobial susceptibility were respectively: 71% for imipenem, 62%: tobramycin, 60%: amikacin 59%: ciprofloxacin 59% piperacillin + tazobactam, 55% piperacillin, 53%: ceftazidime and 44% for ticarcillin. Seventy per cent of the 96 CoNS and 50.2% of the 126 S. aureus isolated were resistant to methicillin. A strain of S. aureus and 2 CoNS strains had intermediate resistance to teicoplanin. Twenty per cent of the 59 Enterococci strains isolated were resistant to aminopenicillins (10/11 strains of E. faecium), and 9% presented a high level of resistance to gentamicine. One strain of E. faecium was resistant to vancomycin. CONCLUSION: The evolution of the susceptibility to antibiotics in intensive care units reflects the antibiotic pressure and level of cross-transmission. High rates of meticillin-resistance among staphylococci, of resistance to beta-lactams antibiotics among P. aeruginosa and of ciprofloxacin among Enterobacteriaceae are shown in this study. The implementation of appropriate strategies for surveillance and prevention is necessary.