BACKGROUND: Before introduction of passive immunoprophylaxis and new antiviral nucleoside analogues the course of hepatitis B recurrence after liver transplantation could hardly be influenced. The result was a inferior graft survival. In the present retrospective analysis of the efficacy of hepatitis B therapy after liver transplantation was analysed retrospectively. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between 1988 and 1998 in total 179 patients were transplanted due to hepatitis B related liver failure at our centre. All patients received passive immunoprophylaxis with hepatitis B immunoglobulin. In case of reinfection after 1993 an antiviral therapy with famciclovir 1500 mg daily was initiated (n = 26), since 1996 lamivudine (100-150 mg daily) was used (n = 12). In case of viral breakthrough under famciclovir treatment or prophylaxis therapy was switched to lamivudine (n = 22). In case of ineffectiveness of lamivudine an antiviral combination therapy with lamivudine and interferon (n = 4) or lamivudine and famciclovir (n = 4) was initiated. Before availability of antiviral agents or in case of viral breakthrough in total 12 patients were retransplanted due to acute or chronic reinfection. RESULTS: With passive immunoprophylaxis reinfection rate was 33%, 43% and 44% after 1, 3 and 5 years respectively. Without antiviral treatment 52% of patients died within the first year after reinfection. Antiviral therapy with lamivudine or famciclovir improved the one year survival after reinfection to 79%. Suppression of viral replication was more effective with lamivudine. Under lamivudine 26 patients (76%) became HBV-DNA negative, 9 patients HBsAg negative (26%). In contrast no patient became HBsAg negative during famciclovir therapy. Lamivudine was effective also after famciclovir breakthrough in 94% of patients. In case of lamivudine resistant reinfection viral replication could be suppressed with an antiviral combination therapy up to negative HBV-DNA in the hybridization assay. Severe side effects were not observed during any of the antiviral therapies. The graft survival after retransplantation for hepatitis B reinfection was 42% and 25% after one and 3 years. CONCLUSION: Whereas it is generally accepted, that passive immunoprophylaxis lowers the reinfection rate it could be shown in the present study, that antiviral treatment lowers mortality of hepatitis B reinfection. The major problem of lamivudine and famciclovir is viral resistance formation. In this case an antiviral combination therapy might be useful, whereas retransplantation for hepatitis B reinfection should be considered carefully due to inferior graft survival rates.