BACKGROUND: In situ treatment of artery/graft infection has distinct advantages compared to vessel excision and extra-anatomic bypass procedures. Based on animal studies of a rifampin-soaked, gelatin-impregnated polyester graft that demonstrated prolonged in vivo antibacterial activity, this antibiotic-bonded graft was used selectively in patients for in situ treatment of low-grade Gram-positive prosthetic graft infections or primary aortic infections not amenable to excision and ex situ bypass. METHODS: In a 5-year period (1995-1999), 27 patients with prosthetic graft infection (aortofemoral, n = 18, femorofemoral, n = 3; axillofemoral, n = 1) or primary aortic infection (mycotic aneurysm, n = 3; infected AAA, n = 2) underwent excision of the infected vessel and in situ replacement with a rifampin soaked (45-60 mg/ml for 15 min) gelatin-impregnated polyester graft. All prosthetic graft infections were low grade in nature, caused Gram-positive bacteria (Staphylococcus epidermidis, 16; Staphylococcus aureus, 5; Streptococcus, 1), and were treated electively. Patients with mycotic aortic aneurysm presented with sepsis and underwent urgent or emergent surgery. RESULTS: Two (8%) patients died-1 as a result of a ruptured Salmonella mycotic aortic aneurysm and the other from methicillin-resistant S. aureus infection following deep vein replacement of an in situ replaced femorofemoral graft. No amputations or late deaths as the result of vascular infection occurred in the 25 surviving patients. Two patients developed recurrent infection caused by a rifampin-resistant S. epidermidis in a replaced aortofemoral graft limb and were successfully treated with graft excision and in situ autogenous vein replacement. Eighteen patients remain alive and clinically free of infection after a mean follow-up interval of 17 months. CONCLUSIONS: In situ replacement treatment using a rifampin-bonded prosthetic graft for low-grade staphylococcal arterial infection was safe, durable, and associated with eradication of clinical signs of infection. Failure of this therapy was the result of virulent and antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains.