Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is a chemokine for neutrophils and an angiogenic factor. Human tumors that express IL-8 may exhibit intense neutrophil infiltration and increased vascularization. Mutatect cells are a murine fibrosarcoma that can be grown as subcutaneous tumors in syngeneic C57BL/6 mice. Since neutrophils are a source of cytotoxic and genotoxic species, we constructed Mutatect cell lines that constitutively express human IL-8 to explore the involvement of neutrophils in tumor biology and genetic instability. An IL-8/neo expression plasmid was stably transfected into Mutatect MC17-51 cells and clone MIL-4 was isolated. Tumors initiated with 5x10(5) MIL-4 cells grew very slowly compared with tumors from pure MC17-51 cells or from 0.5 to 4x10(5) MIL-4 cells mixed with 5x10(5) MC17-51 cells. Over 95% of cells recovered from slow-growing pure MIL-4 tumors lost the transgene as measured by loss of (i) resistance to G418, (ii) expression of IL-8 protein and (iii) IL-8-specific DNA sequences. When tumors from mixed cell types were examined, loss of the transgene did not occur; rather, IL-8 producing cells appeared to have some growth advantage. The neutrophil content of tumors (as measured by myeloperoxidase) was directly proportional to the level of IL-8 expressed at the time tumors were excised. As reported earlier, the frequency of mutations at the hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase locus was also directly proportional to neutrophil content. To explain some of these biological findings, we postulate that early in development of pure MIL-4 tumors, genotoxic/cytotoxic neutrophils are attracted by IL-8, which in turn leads to loss of the transgene and to localized cytotoxicity of IL-8 producing cells. In mixed tumors, where the initial IL-8 concentration may be lower, tumors might become established more readily because fewer neutrophils may be attracted. This relatively simple experimental paradigm has revealed some of the complex biological changes that can occur as a result of IL-8 in tumors.