Six genes (nikP1, nikP2, nikS, nikT, nikU, and nikV) from Streptomyces tendae Tu901 were identified by analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the nikkomycin gene cluster. These genes, together with the previously described nikQ and nikR, span 9.39 kb and are transcribed as a polycistronic mRNA in a growth-phase-dependent manner. The nikP1 gene encodes a non-ribosomal peptide synthase consisting of an adenylation domain, a thiolation domain, and an N-terminal 70-residue segment of unknown function. The amino acid sequence encoded by the nikP2 gene displays similarity to the sequences of thioesterases, and the nikS product belongs to a superfamily of proteins characterized by a specific ATP-binding fold. The N-terminal 70 amino acids of the predicted nikT gene product show significant sequence similarity to acyl carrier proteins, and the C-terminal 330 amino acids to aminotransferases. The sequences of the deduced proteins NikU and NikV exhibit similarity to components S and E, respectively, of glutamate mutase from Clostridium. Disruption of the nikP1, nikS, nikT, or nikV gene by insertion of a kanamycin resistance cassette abolished formation of nikkomycins I, J, X, and Z, all of which contain hydroxypyridylhomothreonine as the peptidyl moiety. The nikP1 mutants, and the nikS and nikT mutants accumulated the nucleoside moieties nikkomycin Cz, and nikkomycins Cx and Cz, respectively. The nikV mutants formed nikkomycins Ox and Oz, which contain 2-amino-4-hydroxy-4-(3'-hydroxy-6'-pyridyl) butanoic acid as the peptidyl moiety. The nikP2 mutants synthesized nikkomycins I, J, X, and Z, but amounts of nikkomycins I and X, which contain formylimidazolone as the base, were lower. Feeding formylimidazolone to nikP2 mutants restored the ability to form nikkomycins I and X. Our results indicate that nikU and nikV are required for the synthesis of hydroxypyridylhomothreonine, the genes nikP1, nikP2 and nikS are required for the assembly of nikkomycins, and nikT is required for both pathways. The putative activities of each of their products are discussed.