Many previous experimental and epidemiological studies have shown that alcohol consumption has a positive correlation with the incidence of hypertension. The effects of ethanol on the nervous and vascular systems in relation to the mechanisms of alcohol-induced hypertension proposed so far are reviewed here. Alcohol ingestion influences many pathophysiological functions which regulate blood pressure, as follows: 1) Sympathetic nervous activity is increased after drinking. 2) Ethanol acts directly on the contractility of vascular smooth muscle. Ethanol acutely contracts some arteries and increases their contractile responses to agonists, while it also displays inhibitory effects on vasocontractility in other arteries. Thus, ethanol has two opposite actions, both of which depend on the kinds of vessels and animal species used for the experiments. Intra- and extracellular Ca2+ mobilization and activation of the contractile apparatus have been suggested as mechanisms for ethanol's vasocontractile actions. 3) Chronic alcohol ingestion has been reported to induce a deficiency of blood and intracellular magnesium, which influences cellular Ca2+ homeostasis through attenuation of plasmalemmal ATPase activity. Direct alcohol effects on cardiovascular systems may not be involved in hypertension that develops after long-term habitual drinking. 4) Ethanol affects vascular endothelial functions, inhibiting endothelial NO- and EDHF-dependent vasorelaxations. 5) The serum levels of vasoactive substances such as cathecolamines, renin-aldosterone, prostacyclin, and endothelin have been reported to be affected by alcohol ingestion or ethanol in vitro. 6) In heavy drinkers, alcohol withdrawal results in an elevation of blood pressure due to sympathetic nervous stimulation. 7) Long-term heavy drinking often results in the development of insulin resistance and glucose intolerance, which in turn triggers hypertension. 8) The difference in the genetic polymorphism of acetaldehyde dehydrogenase among Japanese people may not be directly related to development of alcohol-induced hypertension. As mentioned above, alcohol shows multiple actions on various factors regulating blood pressure. More detailed and integrated mechanisms for alcohol-induced hypertension, which is not a homogeneous disease, remain to be clarified.