OBJECTIVE: To review the impact that factors such as HIV infection, antiretrovirals, and other commonly used drug therapies have on glucose metabolism in HIV-infected patients. DATA SOURCES: Pertinent literature was identified via a MEDLINE search from 1980 to April 2000 and through secondary sources (abstracts presented at recent scientific meetings, manufacturers' package inserts). The key words used were antiretroviral therapy, HIV infection, insulin resistance, and metabolic abnormalities. All information deemed relevant to evaluate the impact that HIV infection and drug therapy have on glucose metabolism in HIV-infected patients was included. DATA SYNTHESIS: The viral burden and stress that are present in HIV-infected patients elicit a complex hormonal and immunologic response that may alter various biochemical pathways, including glucose metabolism. Although rare before the era of potent antiretroviral therapy, insulin resistance has now been described as an important component of the lipodystrophy syndrome. The complex and multifactorial nature of glucose metabolism dysregulation makes management of hyperglycemia or diabetes mellitus challenging in HIV-infected patients. In such a context, a set of recommendations was developed to guide practitioners in assessing, treating, and monitoring hyperglycemia or diabetes mellitus in HIV-infected patients. CONCLUSIONS: Alterations of glucose metabolism observed in HIV-infected patients are more frequent since the introduction of potent antiretroviral therapy. Although the etiology of such abnormalities remains unknown, protease inhibitors and, to a lesser extent, nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are believed to participate in their pathogenic mechanisms. Because of similarities to the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus, management of antiretroviral-induced hyperglycemia could follow that the recommendations of the American Diabetes Association, with special considerations for monitoring patients with HIV infection. Future studies of altered glucose metabolism in HIV-infected patients should focus on understanding the precise mechanism or causes of this complication so that preventive and therapeutic guidelines can be further evaluated.