Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) has been shown to play an important role in the regulation of expression of a subclass of adipocyte genes and to serve as the molecular target of the thiazolidinedione (TZD) and certain non-TZD antidiabetic agents. Hypercorticosteroidism leads to insulin resistance, a variety of metabolic dysfunctions typically seen in diabetes, and hypertrophy of visceral adipose tissue. In adipocytes, the enzyme 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11beta-HSD-1) converts inactive cortisone into the active glucocorticoid cortisol and thereby plays an important role in regulating the actions of corticosteroids in adipose tissue. Here, we show that both TZD and non-TZD PPARgamma agonists markedly reduced 11beta-HSD-1 gene expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. This diminution correlated with a significant decrease in the ability of the adipocytes to convert cortisone to cortisol. The half-maximal inhibition of 11beta-HSD-1 mRNA expression by the TZD, rosiglitazone, occurred at a concentration that was similar to its K(d) for binding PPARgamma and EC(50) for inducing adipocyte differentiation thereby indicating that this action was PPARgamma-dependent. The time required for the inhibitory action of the TZD was markedly greater for 11beta-HSD-1 gene expression than for leptin, suggesting that these genes may be down-regulated by different molecular mechanisms. Furthermore, whereas regulation of PPARgamma-inducible genes such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase was maintained when cellular protein synthesis was abrogated, PPARgamma agonist inhibition of 11beta-HSD-1 and leptin gene expression was ablated, thereby supporting the conclusion that PPARgamma affects the down-regulation of 11beta-HSD-1 indirectly. Finally, treatment of diabetic db/db mice with rosiglitazone inhibited expression of 11beta-HSD-1 in adipose tissue. This decrease in enzyme expression correlated with a significant decline in plasma corticosterone levels. In sum, these data indicate that some of the beneficial effects of PPARgamma antidiabetic agents may result, at least in part, from the down-regulation of 11beta-HSD-1 expression in adipose tissue.