There are no data regarding the activity of clarithromycin's active metabolite, 14-hydroxy clarithromycin, against penicillin-intermediate, penicillin-resistant or erythromycin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae. Agar dilution MICs were determined for clarithromycin, 14-hydroxy clarithromycin (henceforth called 'metabolite'), azithromycin, erythromycin and clarithromycin/metabolite (2:1 and 1:1 ratio) against 24 penicillin-intermediate and 14 penicillin-resistant strains, including 13 erythromycin-resistant clinical strains and one ATCC strain of S. pneumoniae. The interaction between clarithromycin and its metabolite was determined using an agar chequerboard assay against all isolates, and time-kill tests were performed against five penicillin-intermediate (macrolide-susceptible) and five penicillin-resistant (two macrolide-resistant) strains of S. pneumoniae using all antibiotics alone at simulated peak serum concentrations, and clarithromycin/metabolite in a 2:1 ratio (physiological). MICs were as follows: clarithromycin, 0.008-->64 mg/L; metabolite, 0.015-->64 mg/L; erythromycin, 0.015-->64 mg/L; azithromycin, 0.125-->64 mg/L; clarithromycin/metabolite (1:1 and 2:1 combinations), 0.001-->64 mg/L. The MIC of the clarithromycin/metabolite combination was one or more tube dilution lower than the MIC of clarithromycin in 28 of the isolates tested. In chequerboard testing, 13 strains (seven erythromycin susceptible and six erythromycin resistant) demonstrated synergy, 18 additivity and seven indifference. In time-kill testing, bacterial eradication below detection limits occurred with clarithromycin and metabolite in seven of 10 organisms. The combination of parent and metabolite was more rapidly bactericidal than clarithromycin alone in six of the seven isolates (P = 0.026). The metabolite has potent activity against S. pneumoniae and enhances the activity of the parent compound against this organism. The metabolite's activity must be considered in evaluating clarithromycin in vitro to avoid underestimation of clarithromycin's activity against the pneumococcus.