Cross-resistance between different classes of anti-neoplastic agents can jeopardize successful combination cancer chemotherapy. In this study, we observed an unexpected cross-resistance between the podophyllotoxine derivative etoposide (VP) and the nucleoside analogue cladribine (CdA) in CCRF-CEM cells developed for resistance to VP. The resistant cells also displayed 14- and twofold resistance to cytarabine (ara-C) and gemcitabine respectively. Closer analysis of these cells showed that they contained lower amounts of topoisomerase (topo) IIalpha (P < 0.001) and beta protein (P < 0.026), formed substantially lower amounts of the topo II-DNA complex, and had a markedly decreased level of Fas (CD95/APO-1)-ligand mRNA expression. Interestingly, Fas expression in the resistant cells did not differ from that in the parental cell line. No differences were observed in the accumulation/efflux of daunorubicin or in the gene expressions of P-glycoprotein, multidrug resistance-associated protein and the lung resistance-related protein. The activity of deoxycytidine kinase (dCK), responsible for activation of CdA and ara-C, was the same for resistant and wild-type cells. However, there was an increase in the activity of the cytosolic 5'-nucleotidases (5'-NT), responsible for deactivation of nucleotides, amounting to 206% (P < 0.001) for the high Km and 134% (P < 0.331) for the low Km 5'-NT in resistant cells. The high Km 5'-NT is probably responsible for the decreased amount of the active metabolite CdA 5'-triphosphate [40% decreased (P < 0.045)], as well as for other purine ribonucleosides and deoxyribonucleosides triphosphates in the resistant cells. In contrast, a significantly higher deoxycytidine triphosphate (dCTP) level (167%, P < 0.001) was observed in the resistant cells. Thus, this study suggests that the major cause of resistance to the nucleoside analogues CdA and ara-C in cells selected for resistance to VP is a result of metabolic alterations producing increased activity of 5'-NT and higher dCTP levels. Furthermore, these results indicate that there is a common factor in the regulation of nucleotide-degrading enzymes and DNA topoisomerases, which may be altered in cross-resistant cells.