Telithromycin is the first member of a new family of the macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin-B (MLS(B)) class of antimicrobials, the ketolides. It has a good spectrum of activity against respiratory pathogens, including penicillin- and erythromycin-resistant pneumococci, as well as intracellular and atypical bacteria. Furthermore, it has a low potential to select for resistance or induce cross-resistance among other MLS(B) antimicrobials. At the recommended dosage of 800 mg orally once daily, telithromycin reaches maximal plasma concentrations of about 2 mg/L. It penetrates rapidly into bronchopulmonary, tonsillar, sinus and middle ear tissues and/or fluids and achieves high concentrations at sites of infection. It also concentrates within polymorphonuclear neutrophils. In clinical trials in patients with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis (AECB) or pharyngitis/tonsillitis caused by group A beta-haemolytic streptococci, telithromycin 800 mg once daily achieved clinical cure rates of 86 to 95%. In acute maxillary sinusitis (AMS), cure rates were 73 to 91%. A 7- to 10-day regimen of telithromycin was as effective as a 10-day course of amoxicillin 1000 mg 3 times daily, clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily or a 7- to 10-day course of trovafloxacin 200 mg once daily for treating CAP. A 5-day regimen of telithromycin was as effective as a 10-day regimen of cefuroxime axetil 500 mg twice daily or amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 500/125 mg 3 times daily in AECB. A 5-day regimen of telithromycin was as effective as a 10-day regimen of clarithromycin 250 mg twice daily or phenoxymethylpenicillin 500 mg 3 times daily in pharyngitis/tonsillitis, or a 10-day regimen of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 500/125 mg 3 times daily in patients with AMS. Telithromycin was well tolerated across all patient populations. Adverse events associated with telithromycin were generally mild to moderate in intensity and seldom led to treatment discontinuation. The most frequent adverse events were diarrhoea (13.3%) and nausea (8.1%). Other adverse events included dizziness and vomiting.