Analyzing his own findings and the data available in the literature, the author has found that free radicals are a connecting link in the development of early and prolonged adaptation. With rapid adaptation, they make a weighty contribution to the body's bactericidal protection and antimicrobial constitutional immunity. This role is mainly played by the oxygen-dependent phagocytic bactericidal system that generates active oxygen forms and by the inducible arginine-dependent connective tissue cell system that synthesizes nitrogen oxide. While performing, the above enzymatic systems spend their cell energy resources on two concurrent processes: the formation of free radical products and the work of ionic pumps that restore an intracellular ionic and osmotic balance. This causes the accelerated expenditure of the body's energy "currency" ATP and the development of energy deficiency in the cells and tissues. Energy shortage serves as a signal for triggering the cellular genetic apparatus to primarily induce the increased development of the cell energy system, namely that of mitochondria, and the activation of the key systems responsible for steady-state long-term individual adaptation of the immune system, antioxidative protection, etc. It has been now ascertained that there is a common pathogenetic link (excessive production of free radicals) in the mechanism responsible for the influence of not only infections on the body, but other environmental factors (fibrogenic dust, ionizing or ultraviolet radiation, cooling, toxic agents oxidized on cytochrome P-450, hypoxia, hyperoxia, etc.) and vital functions (physical overstrain, emotional stress, informational overload, etc.). The above factors all cause the same metabolic change in different ways: the production of higher quantities of active oxygen forms, nitrogen oxide, and other radical products. So the generation of free radicals is an universal connecting link of early and prolonged adaptation. The fact that there is a common link (the excessive production of radicals) in the mechanism of influence of environmental factors and vital activities makes the most important biological reserve (cross adaptation that lies in higher resistance to the whole complex of active influences at adaptation to one of them) serve as a preventive means. The most rapid increase in the production of free radicals and the development of energy-rich products are achieved by hypoxia. So the adaptive and preventive effect of dosage hypoxia are the most pronounced.