To examine the hypothesis that the ancestral role of the toxR gene in the family Vibrionaceae is control of the expression of outer membrane protein (OMP)-encoding genes for adaptation to environmental change, we investigated the role of the toxR gene in Vibrio anguillarum, an important fish pathogen. The toxR gene of V. angullarum (Va-toxR) was cloned from strain PT-87050 isolated from diseased ayu (Plecoglossus altivelis), and the sequence was analyzed. The toxR sequence was 63 to 51% identical to those reported for other species of the family Vibrionaceae. Distribution of the Va-toxR gene sequence in V. anguillarum strains of various serotypes was confirmed by using DNA probe and PCR methods. An isogenic toxR mutant of V. anguillarum PT-24, isolated from diseased ayu, was constructed by using an allelic exchange method. The wild-type strain and the toxR mutant did not differ in the ability to produce a protease(s) and a hemolysin(s) or in pathogenicity for ayu when examined by the intramuscular injection and immersion methods. A 35-kDa major OMP was not produced by the toxR mutant. However, a 46-kDa OMP was hardly detected in the wild-type strain but was produced as the major OMP by the toxR mutant. For the toxR mutant, the MICs of two beta-lactam antibiotics were higher and the minimum bactericidal concentration of sodium dodecyl sulfate was lower than for the wild-type strain. Analysis of the N-terminal amino acid sequences of the 35- and 46-kDa OMPs indicated that these proteins are the porin-like OMPs and are related to the toxR-regulated major OMPs of the family Vibrionaceae. The results indicate that the toxR gene is not involved in virulence expression in V. anguillarum PT-24 and that toxR regulation of major OMPs is universal in the family Vibrionaceae. These results support the hypothesis that the ancestral role of the toxR gene is regulation of OMP gene expression and that only in some Vibrio species has ToxR been appropriated for the regulation of a virulence gene(s).