To clarify the function of the multidrug transporter P-glycoprotein in mast cells we used the green fluorescent compound Bodipy-FL-verapamil, which is a substrate of P-glycoprotein. This compound is also transported by Multidrug Resistance-related Protein (MRP), another membrane transport protein expressed in many tumour resistant cells as well as in normal cells. When rat peritoneal mast cells were incubated with Bodipy-verapamil, a rapid uptake of this compound was observed. Pretreatment with modulators of P-glycoprotein activity, such as verapamil and vinblastine, increased Bodipy-verapamil intracellular concentrations. In addition, Bodipy-verapamil efflux from these cells was rapid and also inhibited by verapamil and vinblastine. In contrast, no effect was observed when cells were treated with agents, such as probenecid and indomethacin, that are known inhibitors of MRP. Methylamine and monensin, substances that modify the pH values in the granules, were able to lower the concentrations of Bodipy-verapamil. Microscopical observations, conducted in both rat and beige mouse mast cells, demonstrated that the fluorochrome accumulated in the cytoplasmic secretory granules. RT-PCR performed on rat peritoneal mast cells revealed the presence of MDR1a and MDR1b mRNAs; on the contrary, MRP mRNA was not expressed. Mast cells were further treated with the fluorescent probe LysoSensor Blue, a weak base that becomes fluorescent when inside acidic organelles. This substance accumulated in mast cell granular structures and its fluorescence was reduced either by treatment with P-glycoprotein modulators or with agents that disrupt pH gradients. In conclusion, these data further confirm the presence of an active P-glycoprotein, but not of MRP, in rat peritoneal mast cells. These findings, coupled with previous ultrastructural data, lend further support to the assumption that this protein is located on the mast cell perigranular membrane. The functional role of P-glycoprotein in these cells is at present unclear, but a possible involvement in the transport of molecules from the granules to the cytosol can be hypothesized. Alternatively, this protein might be indirectly implicated in changes of pH values inside secretory granules.