A questionnaire covering management practices and producer perception of the effects of gastrointestinal nematode infections was sent to dairy and beef producers in the northeastern US. The mailing list was derived from membership in grazing groups and attendance at grazing events. A final total of 474 responses were suitable for analyses. These responses covered 14 states, but for the purpose of analysis were broken into five groups: New England (NE), Vermont (VT), New York (NY), Pennsylvania (PA), and south and west (S and W) of Pennsylvania. Two-thirds of the responses were from dairy producers. The average number of animals for the farms was 50 cows, 27 heifers, and 20 calves. The average acreage used for grazing was 70 acres, and about two-thirds of the responses used rotational grazing for at least the cows. About one-half of the rotational grazers had been practicing rotational grazing for more than 5 years. Most rotational programs for cows involved a daily rotation, but the rotational interval for other age groups was longer. There was a difference of about 2 months (5.25-7.27) in the length of the grazing season as one moved from New England to south and west of Pennsylvania. Parasite control practices varied greatly by location and animal class. Most producers used anthelmintics one to two times per year, but 10-30% of responses said they did not deworm their cattle. The most common time to deworm was in the spring, and the second most common time was the fall. Between 10 and 20% of respondents reported deworming as a response to decreased productivity or body condition. The use of anthelmintics increased as the location moved from New England to south and west of Pennsylvania. Producer perception of parasite effects was closely related to their anthelmintic use, and also increased as the location moved to the south, and is most likely the result of the increased length of the grazing season. Of producers who ascribed estimated a cost of the parasite, the majority estimated this cost to be between US$ 5 and 20 per animal per year.