BACKGROUND: The natural history of malignancies, the response to cytokine-based therapy and survival of patients may be partly determined by the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) phenotype. Here, we investigated in a retrospective analysis the correlation of the HLA phenotype of 73 prognostic favored patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma to (a) the expected HLA distribution in Caucasians, (b) the susceptibility or resistance to metastatic sites, (c) response to cytokine-based therapy and (d) sustained cytokine-induced effective tumor control. METHODS: We retrospectively determined the MHC class I and II antigens in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma selected by survival. Antigens were serologically typed by standard lymphocytotoxicity techniques. For statistical analysis, we calculated the probability of the presented HLA antigens in correlation to the expected Caucasian HLA phenotypes. An independent confirmation was performed by using the chi-square and two-tailed Fisher's exact test. RESULTS: Various HLA antigens deviated significantly from the normal distribution in the Caucasian population. HLA.B44 was the only antigen associated (p < 0.01) with the absence of lung and presence of bone metastases, while it did not impact on overall survival or response to therapy. A1 (p < 0.0001, p < 0.002) and B8 (p < 0.009, p < 0.04) alleles were more frequently expressed in responding patients than expected from the normal distribution in Caucasians and that observed in non-responding patients, respectively. The HLA analysis of patients achieving a durable complete remission showed a significantly higher frequency of expression of the A1 and B8 antigens and furthermore of the B14 antigen (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Our data underline the pivotal role of the MHC complex in controlling and regulating the cellular immune response in renal cell cancer. We could identify HLA antigens, which correlate with response to cytokine-treatment, with a long-lasting effective tumor control and prolonged overall survival.