The annual multicenter studies on isolated bacteria from infections in general surgery and their antimicrobial susceptibility have been conducted in Japan since July 1982. This paper describes the results obtained in fiscal 1998 (from April 1998 to March 1999). The number of cases investigated as objectives was 225 for one year. A total of 429 strains (121 strains from primary infections and 308 strains from postoperative infections) were isolated from 183 cases (81.3% of total cases). In primary infections, the isolation rates of anaerobes and Escherichia coli were higher than in postoperative infections, while in postoperative infections, those of Gram-positive aerobes and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were higher than in primary infections. On the whole, among Gram-positive aerobes, the isolation rate of Enterococcus faecalis was the highest, followed by Staphylococcus aureus with high frequency in isolation from postoperative infections. Among Gram-positive anaerobes, Peptostreptococcus spp. and Streptococcus spp. were predominantly isolated. Among Gram-negative aerobes, E. coli, P. aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Enterobacter cloacae were frequently isolated. Among Gram-negative anaerobes, Bacteroides fragilis group was the majority of isolates. In primary infections, the percentage of Gram-negative aerobes has gradually increased since fiscal 1995 or 1996 with these years as the turning point, while those of Gram-positive and Gram-negative anaerobes have gradually declined. In postoperative infections, the percentage of Gram-negative anaerobes has increased continuously since the mid-1980s. The percentage of MRSA among S. aureus rose to 89.7%, which was the highest level since the beginning of this study. The susceptibilities of B. fragilis, which did not show apparent changes, were recognized to have decreased against cephems in fiscal 1998. Among other bacteria in B. fragilis group, development of resistance to cephems has continued on a long-term basis since the mid-1980s. E. coli and K. pneuminiae have obviously not changed in susceptibilities, however, the susceptibilities of isolated strains in fiscal 1998 against high-generation cephems, oxacephems and monobactams have declined. We found neither vancomycin-resistant nor teicoplanin-resistant strains of S. aureus and Enterococcus spp.