OBJECTIVE: To present a case describing Candida lusitaniae candidemia in an immunocompetent patient successfully treated with fluconazole antifungal therapy. Time-kill studies of the C. lusitaniae isolate using amphotericin B, and an extensive review of the literature are also presented. CASE SUMMARY: A 52-year-old immunocompetent Latin-American woman was admitted to the special care unit with severe sepsis. Her recent medical history included an exploratory laparotomy for gallstone pancreatitis, requiring cholecystectomy, segmental sigmoid colectomy, drainage of peritoneal abscesses, and a colostomy. In addition, the patient required a central venous catheter (CVC) placement for prolonged broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy and total parenteral nutrition therapy. Yeast was isolated from the abdominal abscess and blood cultures obtained on day 1, and from the catheter tip on day 5. The woman received initial empiric antifungal therapy with fluconazole, which was later changed to amphotericin B. After the yeast was identified as C. lusitaniae on day 8, this was changed to fluconazole for the duration of therapy. C. lusitaniae was not present in blood cultures taken two weeks after the CVC was removed, and the cultures remained negative thereafter. After a prolonged hospitalization, the patient was discharged home. DISCUSSION: Disseminated infections with C. lusitaniae usually occur in immunocompromised patients, although isolated reports of C. lusitaniae infections in immunocompetent patients have been described. Therapeutic challenges of C. lusitaniae treatment include its primary resistance to amphotericin B and species misidentification. Isolates recovered from our patient were submitted for fungus time--kill studies that suggested unique susceptibility patterns to amphotericin B, indicating a trend toward resistance. CONCLUSIONS: Based on variable susceptibility patterns of C. lusitaniae to amphotercin B and flucytosine, fluconazole is an appropriate choice as first-line therapy for C. lusitaniae candidemia.