OBJECTIVE: To examine and compare in vitro basal and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in human omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue derived from lean, overweight or obese individuals, and in those with central or peripheral obesity. DESIGN: In vitro study of basal and insulin-stimulated 2-deoxyglucose uptake in human omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue explants derived from patients undergoing elective abdominal surgery. SUBJECTS: Fourteen lean (average age 47 y, average body mass index (BMI) 22 kg/m(2)), 12 overweight (average age 51 y, average BMI 27 kg/m(2)), and 15 obese subjects (average age 45 y, average BMI 39 kg/m(2)). Ten peripherally obese (average age 43 y, average WHR 0.76) and 17 centrally obese (average age 50 y, average waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) 0.92). MEASUREMENTS: Fatness and fat distribution parameters (by anthropometry), basal and insulin stimulated [(3)H]-2-deoxyglucose uptake in omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue explants. RESULTS: In adipose tissue from lean subjects transport of 2-deoxyglucose over basal was stimulated approximately two-fold by insulin. In contrast, 2-deoxyglucose transport in adipose tissue of obese or overweight subjects was not responsive to insulin. Following incubation with 100-nM insulin for 35 min, insulin-stimulated 2-deoxyglucose transport was significantly lower in both omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue of obese and overweight compared to lean subjects. Basal 2-deoxyglucose uptake was also significantly reduced in omental and subcutaneous tissue in obese compared to lean subjects. Depot-specific differences in 2-deoxyglucose uptake were also seen. Overall 2-deoxyglucose uptake was greater in omental than subcutaneous adipose tissue but this was due to increased basal levels rather than increased insulin action. The reduction in insulin-stimulated 2-deoxyglucose uptake seen in overweight and obese subjects was relatively similar in both depots. However, insulin responsive 2-deoxyglucose transport was significantly lower in the omental adipose tissue of subjects with central obesity, as compared to that of subjects with peripheral obesity. No difference in insulin induced 2-deoxyglucose transport was observed in the subcutaneous adipose tissue explants of subjects with either central or peripheral obesity. CONCLUSION: In lean individuals insulin responsiveness of omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue was similar, but basal glucose uptake was significantly higher in omental adipose tissue. Adipose tissue obtained from overweight as well as obese individuals is insulin resistant. This insulin resistance occurs at a lower BMI than previously expected and is not adipose-depot specific. However, in obese subjects with a central distribution of adiposity insulin resistance occurs at the site of omental adipose tissue, in contrast to those with peripheral obesity.