Cefditoren pivoxil is an orally absorbed prodrug that is rapidly hydrolysed by intestinal esterases to the microbiologically active cephalosporin cefditoren. Cefditoren has a broad spectrum of activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, including common respiratory and skin pathogens. Cefditoren has shown excellent in vitro activity against the Gram-positive pathogens penicillin-susceptible and -intermediate Streptococcus pneumoniae, S. pyogenes and methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. Cefditoren was inactive against methicillin-resistant S. aureus. Of the important Gram-negative pathogens, cefditoren had potent antibacterial effects against beta-lactamase-positive and -negative Haemophilus influenzae, H. parainfluenzae and beta-lactamase-positive and -negative Moraxella catarrhalis. Cefditoren does not have antibacterial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa or atypical respiratory pathogens and has only variable activity against anaerobes. In healthy volunteers, single doses of cefditoren pivoxil 200 and 400mg achieved maximal plasma concentrations of 2.6 to 3.1 mg/L and 3.8 to 4.6 mg/L, respectively. Cefditoren penetrates rapidly into bronchopulmonary and tonsillar tissue as well as inflammatory and noninflammatory blister fluid. In two, randomised, double-blind trials involving patients with acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis (AECB), cefditoren 200 and 400mg twice daily for 10 days produced clinical cure rates of 88 to 89% within 48 hours of treatment completion. Clinical cure rates in patients with AECB were similar to those of either clarithromycin 500mg twice daily or cefuroxime axetil 250mg twice daily. In patients with streptococcal pharyngitis, a 10-day course of cefditoren pivoxil 200mg twice daily produced clinical cure rates of 94% at 4 to 7 days after treatment, which were similar to those observed for phenoxymethylpenicillin potassium 250 mg four times daily. In uncomplicated skin and skin structure infections, a 10-day course of cefditoren pivoxil 200 or 400mg twice daily produced the same clinical cure rate of 89% within 48 hours of treatment completion. These cefditoren pivoxil dosage regimens were as effective as a 10-day course of either cefadroxil 500 mg twice daily or cefuroxime axetil 250mg twice daily in treating uncomplicated skin and skin structure infections, including those caused by S. aureus and S. pyogenes. The most common adverse events associated with therapeutic doses of cefditoren pivoxil are diarrhoea, nausea, headache, abdominal pain and vaginal candidiasis.