Activation of Src, which has an intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase activity, has been demonstrated in many human tumours, such as colorectal and breast cancers, and is closely associated with the pathogenesis and metastatic potential of these cancers. In this study, we have examined the effect of activated Src on the sensitivity to taxotere, an anticancer drug targeting microtubules, using v-src-transfected HAG-1 human gall bladder epithelial cells. As compared with parental HAG-1 cell line, v-src-transfected HAG/src3-1 cells became 5.9 and 7.0-fold sensitive to taxotere for 2 and 24-h exposure, respectively. By contrast, HAG-1 cells transfected with activated Ras, which acts downstream of Src, acquired approximately 2.5- approximately 4.8-fold taxotere resistance. The taxotere sensitivity in HAG/src3-1 cells was reversed, if not completely, by herbimycin A, a specific inhibitor of Src family protein tyrosine kinase, indicating that Src protein tyrosine kinase augments sensitivity to taxotere. Treatment of HAG/src3-1 cells with taxotere resulted in phosphorylation of Bcl-2 and subsequent induction of apoptotic cell death, whereas neither Bcl-2 phosphorylation nor apoptosis occurred in parental or c-H-ras-transfected HAG-1 cells. Interestingly, the Bcl-2 protein is overexpressed in v-src-transfected cell line, compared to those in parental or Ras-transfected cell line. Treatment of HAG/src3-1 cells with herbimycin A significantly reduced the expression and phosphorylation of Bcl-2, and abrogated taxotere-induced apoptosis, suggesting a potential role for Src protein tyrosine kinase in the taxotere-induced apoptotic events. H-7, a protein kinase C inhibitor and wortmannin, a phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3 kinase) inhibitor, neither altered taxotere sensitivity nor inhibited taxotere-induced apoptosis in these cells. These data indicate that the ability of activated Src to increase taxotere sensitivity would be mediated by apoptotic events occurring through Src to downstream signal transduction pathways toward Bcl-2 phosphorylation, but not by activated Ras, PI-3 kinase or protein kinase C.