The intensification of post-remission induction therapy has been shown to improve the relapse-free survival for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), and is now a standard component of the treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. For cytosine arabinoside (ara-C), methotrexate, vincristine and corticosteroids, in-vitro studies indicate that the extracellular drug concentration and exposure time are important determinants of cytotoxicity for human leukaemia cell lines. For L-asparaginase, epipodopyllotoxins and cyclophosphamide, there have been few studies of the relationship between cellular pharmacology and cytotoxicity in relation to ALL. The clinical and cellular pharmacology of methotrexate and cytosine arabinoside have been studied in relation to childhood ALL in vivo. For these drugs, there is evidence to suggest that maintenance of plasma concentrations that are biochemically optimal is necessary to maximize anti-leukaemic effects. For cytosine arabinoside in particular, optimal extracellular fluid concentrations are not likely to be achieved or maintained by bolus or short-duration i.v. infusions. A potentially important example of this may be served by the success of antimetabolite-based intrathecal chemotherapy for CNS-directed treatment of childhood ALL. Intrathecal administration of both methotrexate and cytosine arabinoside results in prolonged leukaemic cell exposure to cytotoxic concentrations of the drug. For vincristine, anthracyclines and asparaginase, the actual dose intensity received by children during consolidation therapy may be important, and there is considerable interpatient variation in the pharmacokinetics of cyclophosphamide and teniposide in the therapy of childhood cancers. The importance of this relationship to childhood ALL is not known. The pharmacological and cellular pharmacological studies performed at St Jude Children's Research Hospital (Memphis, TN, USA) have allowed investigation of the relationships between the clinical and cellular pharmacology of methotrexate and prognosis, and have supported the individualization of consolidation therapy with this drug. Cytosine arabinoside has been less well studied in relation to childhood ALL, although evidence exists to suggest that the administration of conventional-dose bolus or infusion schedules may not be optimal in terms of the antileukaemic efficacy of this antimetabolite. For L-asparaginase, ongoing studies may allow the relationship between dose and schedule of administration to be related to pharmacodynamic measures such as asparagine depletion and prognosis. Therefore, through knowledge of clinical and cellular pharmacological properties, it may be possible to optimize the consolidation phase of therapy for childhood ALL, without disrupting the fundamental principles by which the overall treatment is administered. This may be particularly important for children with disease that has inherent or acquired resistance to therapy.