Helicobacter pylori infection has many different clinical outcomes. Not all infected persons need to be treated. Therefore, indications for treatment have to be clear, and several consensus guidelines have been formulated to aid the medical practitioner in this decision-making process. Triple therapy with a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), in combination with amoxicillin and clarithromycin is the established treatment of choice. For patients with penicillin hypersensitivity, metronidazole can be substituted for amoxicillin. Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a major factor adversely affecting treatment success. Resistance to metronidazole has been reported in up to 80%, and resistance to clarithromycin in 2-10% of strains cultured. Resistance to either one of the antibiotics has been reported to result in a drop in efficacy of up to 50%. Emergence of resistance to both metronidazole and clarithromycin following failed therapy is a cause for concern; this underlines the need to use the best available first-line therapy. To avoid the emergence of resistance to both key antibiotics, the combination of metronidazole and clarithromycin should be avoided where possible. For failed treatment, several strategies can be employed. These include ensuring better compliance with repeat therapy, and maximizing the efficacy of repeat treatment by increasing dosage and duration of treatment, as well as altering the choice of drugs. Quadruple therapy incorporating a bismuth compound with a PPI, tetracycline and metronidazole has been a popular choice as a "rescue" therapy. Ranitidine bismuth citrate has been shown to be able to overcome metronidazole and clarithromycin resistance; it may be a useful compound drug to use in place of a PPI in "rescue" therapies. In the case of persistent treatment failures, it is useful to consider repeating gastroscopy and obtaining tissue for culture, and then prescribe antibiotics according to bacterial susceptibility patterns. It is also important in refractory cases to review the original indication for treatment and determine the importance of the indication.