We analyzed the role of methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) for chemoselective treatment of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). MTAP converts methylthioadenosine into adenine which serves as an alternative purine source, if de novo purine biosynthesis is inhibited by antimetabolites (i.e., methotrexate). The idea of the chemoselectivity concept is that tumors with MTAP deletion at chromosome 9p21 are more susceptible to antimetabolites than normal cells without such a deletion. First, we screened 13 T-ALL lines for 9p21 deletions by comparative genomic hybridization. Five cell lines revealed deletions at the short arm of chromosome 9, dim(9p21pter). Further analyses were performed with CEM cells in which the 9p21 deletion was corroborated by fluorescence in situ hybridization. CEM cells were transfected with an MTAP expression vector. A green fluorescent protein (GFP) plasmid was cotransfected, to monitor the transfection efficacy by flow cytometry. The response of MTAP-transfected cells to the antimetabolites methotrexate (MTX), trimetrexate (TMX), and L-alanosine (ALA) was decreased compared to mock control transfectants using growth inhibition assays. The activity of doxorubicin (DOX) which is not involved in DNA biosynthesis was not changed in MTAP transfectants. As the p16(INK4a) tumor suppressor gene resides also at 9p21, we transfected CEM cells with a p16(INK4a) expression vector. These transfectant cells were more resistant to all four drugs indicating that p16(INK4a) did not specifically affect antimetabolites. The chemoselective effect of antimetabolites in MTAP-deleted tumor cells may, however, be compensated by the development of drug resistance. To prove this possibility, we analyzed an MTX-resistant subline, CEM/MTX1500LV, in which the MTX-resistance conferring dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene was amplified. While TMX exhibited considerable cross-resistance in CEM/MTX1500LV cells, ALA did not. Thus, ALA could exhibit chemoselectivity in 9p21/MTAP-deleted cells, even if DHFR amplification occurs. We conclude that ALA may be more suitable than MTX or TMX for MTAP-mediated chemoselective treatment of T-ALL. Pretherapeutical detection of 9p21 and MTAP deletion may be helpful in developing a predictive molecular chemosensitivity test for T-ALL.