Although biocides have been used for a century, the number of products containing biocides has recently increased dramatically with public awareness of hygiene issues. The antimicrobial efficacy of biocides is now well documented; however, there is still a lack of understanding of their antimicrobial mechanisms of action. There is a wide range of biocides showing different levels of antimicrobial activity. It is generally accepted that, in contrast to chemotherapeutic agents, biocides have multiple target sites within the microbial cell and the overall damage to these target sites results in the bactericidal effect. Information about the antimicrobial efficacy of a biocide (i.e. the eta-value) might give some useful indications about the overall mode of action of a biocide. Bacteriostatic effects, usually achieved by a lower concentration of a biocide, might correspond to a reversible activity on the cytoplasmic membrane and/or the impairment of enzymatic activity. The bacteriostatic mechanism(s) of action of a biocide is less documented and a primary (unique?) target site within the cell might be involved. Understanding the mechanism(s) of action of a biocide has become an important issue with the emergence of bacterial resistance to biocides and the suggestion that biocide and antibiotic resistance in bacteria might be linked. There is still a lack of understanding of the mode of action of biocides, especially when used at low concentrations (i.e. minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) or sublethal). Although this information might not be required for highly reactive biocides (e.g. alkylating and oxidizing agents) and biocides used at high concentrations, the use of biocides as preservatives or in products at sublethal concentrations, in which a bacteriostatic rather than a bactericidal activity is achieved, is driving the need to better understand microbial target sites. Understanding the mechanisms of action of biocides serves several purposes: (i) it will help to design antimicrobial formulations with an improved antimicrobial efficacy and (ii) it will ensure the prevention of the emergence of microbial resistance.