Current bacteriological data are very useful when making therapeutic decisions in cases of non complicated urinary tract infection. In this article, we present the data gathered by a university hospital laboratory in mid-Tunisia as well as the results of 17,829 urinary cytobacteriological examinations conducted in a multidisciplinary hospital during the year 2000. Urine was sowed on usual agar. All bacterium cultivating at least 10(5) bacteria reported to ml and at 37 degrees C in a normal atmosphere was retained; identification and sensitivity to antibiotics of the bacterium followed the recommendations of the French Society of Microbiology. We collected 2063 non-redundant bacteria of which 82.3% came from female samples. Gram negative rods were distinctly predominant with 92% of the whole bacterium and Escherichia coli represented 67% of the whole of the germs; Staphylococcus saprophyticus with 4.8% and Streptococcus agalactiae with 1% dominated Gram positive bacteria. The susceptibility of bacteria to the principal antibiotics used for the treatment of the urinary tract infection was characterised by the low percentage of sensitivity of the Gram negative rods to amoxicillin (41.2% of sensitivity for Escherichia coli and 22% for the Proteus sp), and by cotrimoxazole which preserved an activity between 63.8% for Escherichia coli and 94.7% for Staphylococcus saprophyticus. The highest percentage of sensitivity was achieved by gentamicine (99.4% of Escherichia coli and 98.9% of Staphylococcus saprophyticus) and fluoroquinolons (97.8% of Escherichia coli and 100% of Staphylococcus saprophyticus are sensible); furadoin was active on almost all Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus saprophyticus. Apart from natural resistance, colistin was constantly active. Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus saprophyticus were the major agents of the urinary tract infection. Gentamicin and fluoroquinolons showed themselves to be constantly active antibiotics. Nitrofurans and colistin deserve a better place in therapeutic choice.