Bioprostheses derived from biological tissues have to be fixed and subsequently sterilized before they can be implanted in humans. Currently available crosslinking agents and sterilants used in the fixation or sterilization of biological tissues such as glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde are all highly cytotoxic, which may impair the biocompatibility of bioprostheses. Therefore, it is desirable to provide an agent suitable for use in biomedical applications that is of low cytotoxicity and may form sterile and biocompatible crosslinked products. To achieve this goal, a natural compound (reuterin), produced by Lactobacillus reuteri in the presence of glycerol, was used by our group. It is known that reuterin has antibacterial, antimycotic, and antiprotozoal activities. Additionally, as in the case with formaldehyde, reuterin may react with the free amino groups in biological tissues by using its aldehyde functional group. Therefore, it was speculated that reuterin could be used as a crosslinking agent and a sterilant for biological tissues in the same way as glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde. In the study, the production of reuterin, produced by Lactobacillus reuteri under control conditions, was reported. Preparative chromatography was used to purify reuterin. Also, the minimal inhibitory concentration and minimal bactericidal concentration of reuterin and its antimicrobial activity on a contaminated tissue were investigated. In addition, the cytotoxicity of reuterin was evaluated. Glutaraldehyde, the most commonly used sterilant in the sterilization of biological tissues, was employed as a control. Furthermore, the feasibility of using reuterin as a crosslinking agent in fixing biological tissues was studied. Fresh and the glutaraldehyde-fixed tissues were used as controls. The results obtained in the minimal inhibitory concentration and minimal bactericidal concentration studies and in the sterilization study of a contaminated tissue indicated that the antimicrobial activity of reuterin is significantly superior to its glutaraldehyde counterpart. In addition, the results obtained in the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay showed that reuterin is significantly less cytotoxic than glutaraldehyde. Additionally, it was found that reuterin is an effective crosslinking agent for biological tissue fixation. The reuterin-fixed tissue had comparable free amino group content, denaturation temperature, and resistance against enzymatic degradation as the glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue. In conclusion, the results obtained in this study indicate that reuterin is an effective agent in the sterilization and fixation of biological tissues.