UNLABELLED: Zidovudine is a thymidine analog that, after intracellular phosphorylation to zidovudine triphosphate metabolite, inhibits HIV-specific reverse transcriptase and terminates proviral DNA. Zidovudine administered to mildly symptomatic women with HIV infection in the antepartum (100mg orally 5 times/day), intrapartum (2 mg/kg intravenously over 1 hour then 1 mg/kg/h) and then to the neonate for 6 weeks (2 mg/kg), significantly reduced the rate of vertical HIV transmission by about two thirds, in the absence of breast-feeding (The Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group 076 trial, standard protocol). Shorter zidovudine regimens, reduced the risk of transmission of HIV by 50% in a non-breast-feeding population and by about 37% in breast-feeding populations. Zidovudine (standard protocol) in combination with lamivudine was superior to zidovudine alone. A short oral zidovudine regimen was not as effective as a two-dose oral nevirapine regime, although the combination of short-course zidovudine plus lamivudine was as effective. Suppression of viral replication in neonates, infants and children has been achieved with zidovudine when used in triple-therapy regimens that include other antiviral drugs. Results from a trial of treatment-naive children indicate that the antiviral efficacy of combinations of zidovudine and lamivudine or abacavir, given with the protease inhibitor nelfinavir, is superior to treatment with this combination minus nelfinavir. When zidovudine was used in other highly active antiretroviral therapy regimens significant improvements in surrogate markers were consistently seen. Changing to ritonavir-containing regimens was superior to changing to treatment with two new nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Short- and long-term (up to 5.6 years) outcomes from clinical trials showed that prenatal and neonatal exposure to zidovudine was generally well tolerated with the exception of mild anemia that resolved spontaneously after treatment cessation. Zidovudine was generally well tolerated as monotherapy in clinical trials of pediatric patients with HIV infection, and adverse events were similar to those reported in adults, with anemia and neutropenia being the most common. CONCLUSION: Zidovudine, as monotherapy or in combination with other antiretroviral agents, remains a first-choice therapy for the prophylaxis of mother-to-child HIV transmission as shown by substantial reductions in transmission rates. Where feasible, the optimal strategy to prevent vertical transmission is to combine drug therapy with Cesarean section delivery and no breast-feeding. In addition, zidovudine in combination with another nucleoside analogue and a protease inhibitor is a first- or second-choice therapy for the treatment of pediatric HIV infection as significant and sustained reductions in viral load have been shown in both plasma and cerebrospinal fluid.