The prevalence of strains of Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative (CN) staphylococci, Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis, E. faecium and Bacillus cereus, was investigated in 111 bulk milk samples. Staphylococcus aureus was isolated from 38 samples, CN staphylococci from 63 samples, E. coli from 49 samples, E. faecalis or E. faecium from 107 samples, and L. monocytogenes from two samples. Bacillus cereus was not found in any of the samples and three samples were free of any of the selected species. Sensitivity to the anti-microbial drugs amikacin, ampicillin, ampicillin + sulbactam, cephalothin (CLT), cephotaxime, clindamycin, chloramphenicol (CMP), co-trimoxazole, erythromycin (ERY), gentamicin, neomycin, norfloxacin, oxacillin, penicillin, streptomycin (STR), tetracycline (TTC) and vancomycin was tested using the standard dilution technique. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) characteristics (MIC50, MIC90, MIC range) were determined for each microbial species. Resistance against one or more anti-microbial drugs was found in 93% of S. aureus, 40% of CN staphylococci, 73% of E. coli, 88% of E.faecalis, 55% of E.faecium, and one L. monocytogenes strain. Most of the strains, particularly enterococci, were resistant to STR, TTC, and ERY (MIC50 4 microg/ml). A high percentage of staphylococci were resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics. High resistance to CLT was found in 11 strains of E. coli (MIC 256 microg/ml) and strains resistant to CMP (MIC90 16 microg/ml) were detected. The highest numbers of resistance phenotypes were found in E. coil (16) and CN staphylococci (12). Eighteen identical resistance phenotypes were demonstrated in indicator bacteria (E. coli, E. faecalis, E. faecium) and pathogens (S. aureus, CN staphylococci) isolated from the same bulk milk sample. The obtained resistance data were matched against the herd owners' information on therapeutic use of the drugs. This confrontation could not explain the findings of strains resistant to ERY or CMP. Our findings are evidence of selection of resistant strains among not only pathogenic agents, but also among indicator bacteria which can become significant carriers of transmissible resistance genes.