Use of combinations of antimicrobials that together achieve synergistic activities against targeted microorganisms is one potential strategy for overcoming bacterial resistance. As the incidence of infections caused by multidrug-resistant staphylococci and enterococci increases, the importance of devising additional synergistic drug combinations for these bacteria is magnified. We evaluated a number of antimicrobial combinations, with a focus on quinupristin-dalfopristin (Q-D), cefepime, and linezolid, using a previously described in vitro pharmacodynamic model. The combination of Q-D with either linezolid or vancomycin, as well as the combination of cefepime-vancomycin, resulted in enhanced killing (> or =2-log(10) increase in killing versus the most-active single agent) against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) 494. An improved effect (<2 log(10) kill increase in kill) against MRSA 494 was noted for cefepime plus either Q-D or linezolid, as well as linezolid-vancomycin. Similar relationships were observed for a methicillin-susceptible S. aureus isolate (isolate 1199). Against methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis R444, enhanced killing was achieved with the combination of cefepime-linezolid, while improvement was noted for vancomycin with either cefepime or linezolid. The combination of cefepime and vancomycin also achieved enhanced killing against a glycopeptide-intermediate-susceptible S. aureus isolate (isolate 992). The combination of linezolid and doxycycline achieved an enhanced effect against vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis (VREFc) and E. faecium. Q-D plus ampicillin or linezolid resulted in similar enhancement of activity against the VREFc isolate. The results of this study suggest a number of novel antimicrobial combinations that may be useful against staphylococci and enterococci. Combination regimens including cefepime, Q-D, and/or linezolid warrant further investigation for the treatment of refractive infections due to multidrug-resistant gram-positive pathogens.