Worldwide surveillance of antimicrobial resistance among urinary tract pathogens is useful to determine important trends and geographical variation for common Gram-positive and -negative species. The most common causative uropathogens often have intrinsic or acquired resistance mechanisms which include ESBL production among enteric bacilli, multi-drug resistant staphylococci and non-fermentative Gram-negative bacilli such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp. and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus spp. This study evaluates pathogen frequency and the resistance rates among urinary tract infection (UTI) pathogens in 14 medical centres in the Asia-Pacific region between 1998 and 1999. The isolates were referred to a central monitor for reference NCCLS broth microdilution testing, identification confirmation and patient demographic analysis. Over 50% of the 958 pathogens were Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp. followed by P. aeruginosa, Enterococcus spp. and Enterobacter spp. Susceptibility for the three enteric bacilli was high for carbapenems (100%), 'fourth-generation' cephalosporins (cefepime 94.9-98.6%) and amikacin (> or = 93.0%). Beta-lactamase inhibitor compounds were more active against E. coli (piperacillin/tazobactam; > 90% susceptible) than the other two enteric species and all other tested agents had a narrower spectra of activity. The rank order of anti-pseudomonal agents was amikacin (91.5% susceptible)> imipenem > piperacillin/tazobactam > tobramycin > ceftazidime and cefepime (77.4 and 76.4% susceptible, respectively). Susceptibility to quinolones for the P. aeruginosa isolates was only 63.2-67.0%. Only one vancomycin-intermediate Enterococcus spp. (van C phenotype) was detected among the 103 strains tested. Newer fluoroquinolones (gatifloxacin; MIC(50), mg/l) were more potent against enterococci than ciprofloxacin (MIC(50), 2 mg/l) and high-level resistance to aminoglycosides was common (41.7%). The data presented are compared to studies of similar design from other areas which are part of the SENTRY surveillance network.