OBJECTIVES: Monitor the evolution in France of antibiotic sensitivity of non-typhoid salmonella isolated in fecal cultures conducted in army hospital laboratories. METHODS: A prospective study was performed from January 1998 to December 1999 in all the biology departments of the 11 army hospitals in France. All the non-repetitive strains were sent to an official center for serotyping and determination of the minimum inhibiting concentrations, by dilution in Mueller Hinton's gelose. The antibiotics currently used in treatment were tested and interpretation endpoints followed the recent recommendations of the Antibiogram committee of the French society of microbiology. Identification of beta-lactamase was conducted by iso-electric focalization and polymerization by chain reaction (PCR). For Salmonella Typhimurium, research for the specific resistance locus of the DT104 clone was made using PCR. RESULTS: Two hundred and twenty-two non-repetitive salmonella strains were isolated. The principle serotypes found were: Salmonella Enterididis (23.9%), S. Typhimurium (21.2%) and S. Hadar (10.8%). All the strains were sensitive to ciprofloxacin and cefotaxim, whereas one third exhibited reduced sensitivity to aminopenicillin. Depending on the serotype, Typhimurium and Hadar serotypes exhibited significantly lesser sensitivity to aminopenicillin, nalidixic acid and tetracycline. For S. Typhimurium, resistance is related to the diffusion of the multiresistant DT104 clone, which involves half of the strains of this serotype. For S. Hadar, 18 out of 24 strains (75%) were resistance to nalidixic acid, and 5 of them exhibited reduced resistance to ciprofloxacin. There was no difference in sensitivity to antibiotics between the strains responsible for diarrhea and those isolated in systematic examinations for capacity to work in the food trade (respectively 54 and 46% of strains). CONCLUSION: Non-typhoid salmonella are frequently isolated in diarrhea of infectious origin. The increasing resistance to antibiotics is primarily related to the diffusion of the DT104 clone, regarding S. Typhimurium and to the increase in resistance to quinolone, regarding S. Hadar.