Vinorelbine is a semisynthetic vinca alkaloid that is effective as monotherapy in elderly patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In the large comparative Elderly Lung Cancer Vinorelbine Italian Study (ELVIS), patients receiving vinorelbine monotherapy achieved an objective response rate of 19.7%. The median survival time and the 1-year survival rate were significantly higher in recipients of vinorelbine plus best supportive care than in recipients of best supportive care alone. Vinorelbine recipients generally scored better than recipients of best supportive care on quality-of-life (QOL) functioning scales and experienced significantly fewer lung cancer-related symptoms; however, QOL scores were worse with vinorelbine for parameters relating to drug tolerability. Comparative phase III trials investigating the efficacy of combination therapy with vinorelbine and other agents specifically in elderly patients with advanced NSCLC have been conducted only for the combination of vinorelbine and gemcitabine [the Southern Italy Cooperative Oncology Group (SICOG) trial and the Multicenter Italian Lung Cancer in the Elderly Study (MILES)]. Objective response rates for vinorelbine/gemcitabine combination therapy in these phase III trials were 22 and 20%, respectively. The SICOG trial was closed early when an interim analysis demonstrated a significant survival advantage for combination therapy with vinorelbine plus gemcitabine over vinorelbine monotherapy. However, a survival advantage for combination therapy versus vinorelbine monotherapy was not demonstrated in the larger MILES trial. The main adverse effect of vinorelbine monotherapy in the elderly is myelosuppression. Adverse events associated with most antineoplastic agents, such as mild alopecia, nausea, vomiting and mucositis, were reported in clinical trials; however, these events were rarely severe. Mild-to-moderate neurotoxicity, including constipation (presumably from autonomic neuropathy), was also reported. The addition of gemcitabine to vinorelbine increased the incidence of both haematological and nonhaematological adverse events. However, there was no significant increase in the incidence of life-threatening toxicity. Vinorelbine as a single agent is effective in elderly patients with NSCLC and is associated with improved survival and at least a trend towards improved QOL parameters compared with best supportive care alone. Vinorelbine was associated with a generally manageable tolerability profile. The benefit of adding gemcitabine to vinorelbine for the treatment of NSCLC in the elderly is equivocal; improved survival was reported in one comparative trial, but not in another larger one. Vinorelbine is an effective and well tolerated palliative treatment option for elderly patients with advanced NSCLC.