The increasing antimicrobial resistance amongst bacterial pathogens causing community-acquired respiratory tract infections (CARTIs) necessitates surveillance at the local, regional, national and international levels to provide information to guide empiric antimicrobial therapy. PROTEKT (Prospective Resistant Organism Tracking and Epidemiology for the Ketolide Telithromycin) is a longitudinal, global, multicenter surveillance study designed to monitor the worldwide development of antimicrobial resistance and disseminate up-to-date information via the internet to assist in the choice of empiric therapy at the local level. In this paper, the results for the first year of PROTEKT are presented from a global perspective. Streptococcus pneumoniae, followed by Haemophilus influenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis, are the principal organisms responsible for the majority of CARTIs. The global prevalence of penicillin G resistance in S. pneumoniae has risen to an alarming 36.3% (high-level resistance 22.1%, intermediate-level 14.2%) with the highest prevalence found in Asia (68%). In all regions, macrolide resistance is greater than penicillin G resistance with a global prevalence rate of 31.2%. High resistance rates were also found for tetracycline (30.5%) and co-trimoxazole (43.9%), and multiresistance was found between penicillin G, macrolides, tetracycline and co-trimoxazole. The prevalence of beta-lactamase-producing H. influenzae and M. catarrhalis was found to be similar to previous reports. Macrolide resistance in S. pyogenes was 0.3% overall. Telithromycin demonstrated excellent in vitro activity against all organisms and is a potential new candidate for the empiric therapy of CARTIs. The first year of PROTEKT has provided valuable information on the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance of bacterial agents causing CARTIs that can be used for guiding empiric therapy and policies. The rapidly developing and geographically varying resistance observed in this study further emphasizes the need for accurate up-to-date surveillance data.