There are multiple interventions available that may help to control the development and spread of resistance to antimicrobial agents in bacteria implicated in community-acquired respiratory tract infections. Unfortunately, very few studies have assessed the effectiveness of these interventions using objective end-points, such as reduction in resistance rates and improvement in clinical outcomes. Most interventions are centered on reducing inappropriate or unnecessary use of antibiotics; others focus on reducing disease burden and bacterial colonization. With regard to antibiotic use, efforts should be concentrated at both the prescriber and consumer levels. Interventions that target prescribers include: provision of educational materials; strategies and tools to improve diagnosis; implementation of practice guidelines; personalized interactive sessions with feedback on the practice profile; and use of delayed prescription and alternative prescribing strategies. Optimal results are usually obtained when these interventions are combined with consumer education. Regulatory interventions (e.g. licensing regulations and controlled access to drugs), restrictions in the use of agents for growth promotion in animals, and use of nonantimicrobial therapies (e.g. probiotics) may help further to reduce inappropriate antibiotic use and thereby decrease the selective pressure for development of resistance. Infection-control strategies, public health measures, vaccination programs, and new antibiotics all have a role in minimizing the spread of resistant organisms. Ideally, resistance-control programs should include predefined criteria for success and integral audit processes based on objective end-points (antibiotic use, resistance trends, and health outcomes). Standardization of data collection is imperative so that the relative merits of various interventions can be compared. Effective implementation and audit of interventions is often difficult in developing countries owing to poor health-care infrastructures, lack of resources, poor education/training, and minimal regulatory controls on the supply and quality of antimicrobials. Substantial support from governments and health-care organizations across the globe is required to initiate and sustain effective intervention programs to control antimicrobial resistance.