BACKGROUND: Tumors have an inherent immunogenicity that can be exploited by immunotherapy. However, often tumors develop mechanisms that render them resistant to most immunologic cytotoxic effector mechanisms. This study examines the underlying mechanism of resistance to Apo2L/TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand)-mediated apoptosis. METHODS: We studied prostate tumor cell lines for their sensitivity to Apo2L/TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in the presence and absence of the sensitizing agent actinomycin D (Act D). Apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry and signaling for apoptosis by Western blot. RESULTS: Treatment with subtoxic concentrations of Act D significantly sensitizes the tumor cells (CL-1, DU-145, and PC-3 prostate tumor cells) to Apo2L/TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. The cytotoxicity of Act D-sensitized prostate tumor cells was a result of synergistic activation of caspases (caspase-3, -9, and -8), detectable after 6 hr of treatment. Treatment with Apo2L/TRAIL alone, although it was insufficient to induce apoptosis, resulted in the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria into the cytoplasm in the absence of significant caspases activation. These findings suggested that a major apoptosis resistance factor blocking the Apo2L/TRAIL apoptotic signaling events is present downstream of the mitochondrial activation. The expression of receptors and anti-apoptotic proteins were examined in Act D-sensitized CL-1 cells. The earliest and the most pronounced change induced by Act D was down-regulation of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) and up-regulation of Bcl-xL/-xS proteins. The role of XIAP in resistance was demonstrated by overexpression of Smac/DIABLO, which inhibited inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs) and sensitized the cells to Apo2L/TRAIL. Apo2L/TRAIL receptors (DR4, DR5, DcR1, and DcR2), c-FLIP, Bcl-2, and other IAP members (c-IAP1 and c-IAP2) were marginally affected at later times in the cells sensitized by Act D. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that the combination of Act D-induced down-regulation of XIAP (Signal I) and Apo2L/TRAIL-induced release of cytochrome c (Signal II) leads to the reversal of resistance to Apo2L/TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in the tumor cells. The sensitization of tumor cells to Apo2L/TRAIL by Act D is of potential clinical application in the immunotherapy of drug/Apo2L/TRAIL refractory tumors.