Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has been prevalent in our hospital over the last three years. Differentiation among MRSA strains by DNA typing in addition to antibiotic resistance pattern surveillance is crucial in order to implement infection control measures. The aim of this study was to characterize MRSA isolates from patients admitted to Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (HUKM) by phenotypic (analyses of antibiotic susceptibility pattern) and genotypic (PFGE) techniques to determine the genetic relatedness of the MRSA involved and to identify endemic clonal profiles of MRSA circulating in HUKM. Seventy one MRSA strains collected between January to March 2000 from patients from various wards in HUKM were tested for antimicrobial resistance and typed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Four major types of PFGE patterns were identified (A, B, C and D) among MRSA strains. Two predominant PFGE types were recognised, Type A (59.2%) and Type B (33.8%). Most of these strains were isolated from ICU, Surgical wards and Medical wards. MRSA strains with different PFGE patterns appeared to be widespread among wards. Strains with the same antibiotype could be of different PFGE types. Most of isolates were resistant to ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, gentamicin and penicillin. One isolate with a unique PFGE pattern Type D and susceptible to gentamicin was identified as a different clone. Some isolates obtained from the same patient showed different PFGE subtypes suggesting that these patients were infected/colonized with multiple MRSA strains. PFGE analysis suggests that MRSA strains with different PFGE types was propagated within our hospital. The relationship between antibiotic susceptibility and PFGE patterns was independent. The ability of PFGE technique in differentiating our MRSA strains make it a method of choice for investigating the source, transmission and spread of nosocomial MRSA infection, and thus an appropriate control programme can be implemented to prevent the spread of MRSA infection.