Clinical microbiology laboratories in Japan have not yet established standards for selecting the most appropriate antimicrobial agents for testing and reporting antimicrobial susceptibility that are comparable to the performance standards of the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards(NCCLS) in the United States of America. Selection of the most appropriate antimicrobial agents for testing and reporting was discussed by a working group(WG) consisting of medical physicians, surgeons, pharmacists, medical technologists and medical microbiologists. The WG agreed on the following basic criteria for the selection of antimicrobial agents: 1) the agent should be useful when screening various resistant bacteria, 2) the agent should serve as a useful guide for physicians and residents when selecting antimicrobial agents, and 3) the agent should be useful for controlling nosocomial infections and resistant bacteria. Clinically isolated microorganisms were classified into 7 groups based on susceptibility to antimicrobial agents. These groups were Staphylococcus spp. or Enterococcus spp., Streptococcus spp. or Haemophilus spp., enterobacteriae, glucose non-fermenting gram positive rods(NFRs), anaerobic bacteria, fungi and mycobacterium. After considering clinical and bacteriological evidence, the WG decided on several antimicrobial agents for testing in clinical microbiology laboratories in Jichi Medical School Hospital. For the NFR group, these were Piperacillin(PIPC), ceftazidime(CAZ), cefepime, imipenem, amikacin and levofloxacin(LVFX). For the enterobacteriae group, these were Amplicillin(ABPC), PIPC, aztreonam, CAZ and LVFX. For the Staphylococcus spp. or Enterococcus spp. group, these were oxacillin, ABPC, vancomycin and gentamicin. We concluded that the most appropriate antimicrobial agent for testing and reporting must be economical and agreed upon at the hospital level, although the ultimate selection must be based on the available clinical and bacteriological evidence.