We report the results of pathogen frequency and antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates collected from skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs) in Latin American medical centers during the first 4 years (1997-2000) of the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program. Ten laboratories participated each year distributed among nine cities in six countries. A total of 1,789 bacterial isolates were susceptibility tested by reference broth microdilution at the coordinating central laboratory. Results from isolates collected during the year 2000 were compared with those from isolates collected during the prior three years. Selected carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa were genotyped by automated ribotyping to evaluate the occurrence of clonal, epidemic dissemination. The five most frequently isolated species were (n/%): Staphylococcus aureus (584/32.8%), Escherichia coli (233/13.1%), P. aeruginosa (211/11.9%), Enterococcus spp. (137/7.7%), and Klebsiella spp. (127/5.8%). The most problematic antimicrobial resistances were related to the high prevalence of multi-drug resistant (MDR) Gram-negative bacilli. Carbapenem resistance among non-fermentative Gram-negative bacilli was much higher than that reported in other regions evaluated in the SENTRY Program. Only 74.9% of P. aeruginosa and 84.9% of Acinetobacter spp. were considered susceptible to imipenem. The antimicrobial susceptibility rates of P. aeruginosa decreased during the study period for most antimicrobial agents evaluated. More than 40% of K. pneumoniae and nearly 10% of E. coli showed an extended spectrum beta-lactamase phenotype. Only 73.4% of E. coli and 76.0% of Enterobacter spp. were susceptible to ciprofloxacin. The molecular typing of carbapenem-resistant P. aeruginosa demonstrated clonal dissemination in two institutions. These reported results indicate that rates of resistance among isolates causing SSTI continue to raise in Latin America, with specific concerns for the high prevalence of MDR Gram-negative bacilli. National and international surveillance programs as a guide to focusing intervention strategies should assist in the control of escalating antimicrobial resistance in this geographic area.