The emergence of resistance has imposed a modification of the protocols for the treatment of Streptococcus pneumoniae (S pneumoniae) bacterial meningitis. Amoxicillin is no longer adapted. As resistance to C3G appeared, a synergistic effect of an association C3G + vancomycine was demonstrated. Thus currently this association should be recommended in any case of meningitis supposedly due to S pneumoniae. The treatment is then modified according to the evolution and the minimal inhibition concentration (MIC) of the bacteria. The strains carrying a high level of resistance to cephalosporin (MIC > or = 4 micrograms ml-1) or tolerant to vancomycine may cause a therapeutic failure despite an increase of the dosage of cephalosporin. Rifampicin, fosfomycine, or imipenem (despite its risk of convulsions), may represent alternative options, as long as we do not have safe quinolones active on resistant strains of S. pneumoniae. Dexamethasone has been formerly implicated in the relapse of pneumococcal meningitis. Furthermore, its use is questionable since no evidence of a therapeutic benefit has been clearly demonstrated. As a consequence of the resistance phenomenon the management of S. pneumoniae meningitis must include particular measures: at least resistance to penicillin must be checked by the oxacilline disk and the MIC to C3G must be measured by E test; aCSF sample should be obtained between 36 and 48 hours following the beginning of the treatment to check its sterilization. All recent studies have shown a similar prognosis of meningitis due to resistant S. pneumoniae as compared to those due to sensitive strains. However, these data should be interpreted with caution since in these studies, pneumococcus resistant to cephalosporin (the real problem) are not separated from those only resistant to penicillin. Furthermore, presently, the incidence of strains highly resistant to cephalosporin is still low. The new conjugated vaccine against pneumococcus should change the situation if its ability to prevent the circulation of resistant strains is confirmed.