The aim of the present study was to characterize the pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationship of GV143253A, a novel trinem anti-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) agent active against gram-positive cocci, including multidrug-resistant clinical isolates. An in vitro pharmacodynamic study with methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) and MRSA has shown that the duration of exposure to GV143253A rather than its concentration is the major determinant of the extent of bacterial killing. The in vitro findings were confirmed by use of a neutropenic murine model of thigh infection caused by MSSA ATCC 25923. From the dose-response curves, the static doses extrapolated for three different dosing intervals showed that more frequent dosing of GV143253A was more effective than less frequent dosing. A pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic analysis demonstrated that only the time during which the drug concentration exceeded the MIC (t>MIC) correlated with in vivo GV143253A activity. The value of t>MIC required to achieve a bacteriostatic effect in a thigh infection of neutropenic animals was 20% (95% confidence interval [CI], 18 to 22%) of the dosing interval. This result is similar to those reported in the literature for carbapenems and for GV104326A, another novel trinem compound. In addition, in order to compare the therapeutic efficacy of GV143253A to that of vancomycin in a thigh infection caused by MRSA in immunocompetent mice, suitable dosing regimens were designed on the basis of previous pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic findings for GV143253A and on the human pharmacokinetic profile of the glycopeptide. Although the pharmacokinetic profiles of the two agents were completely different, GV143253A showed good efficacy comparable to that of vancomycin, reducing by 4 log units the bacterial counts in the thighs of treated mice relative to untreated infected animals after 48 h of therapy. The results suggest that if the time of exposure to the pathogen above the MIC is at least 30% of the dosing interval, GV143253A could have a role in the clinical treatment of infections caused by MRSA, which is difficult to eradicate with current antibiotics.