Influenza vaccination is estimated to be 50-68% efficacious in preventing pneumonia, hospitalisation or death in nursing home residents. Large culture-proven outbreaks may occur despite high resident vaccination rates. There is, therefore, a significant role for concurrent administration of influenza vaccination and antiviral therapy. The use of antiviral treatment and chemoprophylaxis requires community reporting of viral isolates, and contingency plans for rapid case identification and application of antiviral therapy. Clinicians must react quickly to control a highly infectious seasonal pathogen that may strike as an explosive outbreak. This situation is unique in geriatric practice. Current antiviral treatment should be administered within 48 hours of symptom onset, and is more efficacious if administered within 12 hours. In the case of an explosive institutional outbreak, a 1-day delay in prophylaxis may allow infection of many residents with a potentially fatal illness. Influenza must be differentiated from other respiratory viruses or syndromes. Grouped rapid diagnostic tests can aid laboratory confirmation. Antiviral agents include the M(2) inhibitors, amantadine and rimantadine, active against influenza A, and the neuraminidase inhibitors, zanamivir and oseltamivir, active against influenza A and B. In our experience, influenza B illness is as severe as influenza A. All agents have similar efficacy as treatment and prophylaxis against sensitive strains. When M(2) inhibitors are used simultaneously within an enclosed space (i.e. household or nursing home) as both treatment and prophylaxis, resistant strains may emerge that limit prophylactic efficacy. When M(2) inhibitors are administered to suspected cases (residents or staff) in institutions, precautions against secretion are especially important to diminish the risk of transmission of resistant virus. Rimantadine has been shown to have significantly fewer CNS adverse events compared with amantadine. Amantadine and oseltamivir require dosage adjustment in those with renal impairment. Oseltamivir, rimantadine and amantadine are administered by mouth, while zanamivir is administered by oral inhalation in a lactose powder. The labelling advises caution in the use of zanamivir in those with underlying airway disease. Pooled analysis of studies in patients given zanamivir indicate that individuals over the age of 50 years (at high risk for complications) and those severely symptomatic at presentation, tend to benefit most from early treatment. Neuraminidase inhibitors also diminish the need for antibacterials to treat secondary complications. An institutional programme to control influenza should include vaccination, and contingency plans for clinical surveillance, specimen processing and the rapid application of antiviral treatment and prophylaxis.