BACKGROUND: Propionibacterium acnes and P. granulosum are widely regarded as the aetiological agents of inflammatory acne. Their proliferation and metabolism are controlled using lengthy courses of oral and/or topical antibiotics. Despite numerous reports of skin colonization by antibiotic-resistant propionibacteria among acne patients, accurate prevalence data are available only for the U.K. OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of skin colonization by antibiotic-resistant propionibacteria among acne patients and their contacts from six European centres. METHODS: Skin swabs were collected from 664 acne patients attending centres in the U.K., Spain, Italy, Greece, Sweden and Hungary. Phenotypes of antibiotic-resistant propionibacteria were determined by measuring the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of a panel of tetracycline and macrolide, lincosamide and streptogramin B (MLS) antibiotics. Resistance determinants were characterized by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers specific for rRNA genes and erm(X), followed by nucleotide sequencing of the amplified DNA. RESULTS: Viable propionibacteria were recovered from 622 patients. A total of 515 representative antibiotic-resistant isolates and 71 susceptible isolates to act as control strains were characterized phenotypically. The prevalence of carriage of isolates resistant to at least one antibiotic was lowest in Hungary (51%) and highest in Spain (94%). Combined resistance to clindamycin and erythromycin was much more common (highest prevalence 91% in Spain) than resistance to the tetracyclines (highest prevalence 26.4% in the U.K.). No isolates resistant to tetracycline were detected in Italy, or in Hungary. Overall, there were strong correlations with prescribing patterns. Prevalence of resistant propionibacteria on the skin of untreated contacts of the patients varied from 41% in Hungary to 86% in Spain. Of the dermatologists, 25 of 39 were colonized with resistant propionibacteria, including all those who specialized in treating acne. None of 27 physicians working in other outpatient departments harboured resistant propionibacteria. CONCLUSIONS: The widespread use of topical formulations of erythromycin and clindamycin to treat acne has resulted in significant dissemination of cross-resistant strains of propionibacteria. Resistance rates to the orally administered tetracycline group of antibiotics were low, except in Sweden and the U.K. Resistant genotypes originally identified in the U.K. are distributed widely throughout Europe. Antibiotic-resistant propionibacteria should be considered transmissible between acne-prone individuals, and dermatologists should use stricter cross-infection control measures when assessing acne in the clinic.