AIM: Eradication therapy with proton pump inhibitor, clarithromycin and amoxicillin is extensively used, although it fails in a considerable number of cases. A 'rescue' therapy with a quadruple combination of omeprazole, bismuth, tetracycline and metronidazole (or ranitidine bismuth citrate with these same antibiotics) has been recommended, but it still fails in approximately 20% of cases. Our aim was to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of a rifabutin-based regimen in patients with two consecutive H. pylori eradication failures. PATIENTS AND METHODS: DESIGN: Prospective multicenter study. PATIENTS: Consecutive patients in whom a first eradication trial with omeprazole, clarithromycin and amoxicillin and a second trial with omeprazole, bismuth, tetracycline and metronidazole (three patients) or ranitidine bismuth citrate with these same antibiotics (11 patients) had failed were included. INTERVENTION: A third eradication regimen with rifabutin (150 mg bid), amoxicillin (1 g bid) and omeprazole (20 mg bid) was prescribed for 14 days. All drugs were administered together after breakfast and dinner. Compliance with therapy was determined from the interrogatory and the recovery of empty envelopes of medications. OUTCOME: H. pylori eradication was defined as a negative 13C-urea breath test 8 weeks after completing therapy. RESULTS: Fourteen patients have been included. Mean age +/- SD was 42 +/- 11 years, 41% males, peptic ulcer (57%), functional dyspepsia (43%). All patients took all the medications and completed the study protocol. Per-protocol and intention-to-treat eradication was achieved in 11/14 patients (79%; 95% confidence interval = 49-95%). Adverse effects were reported in five patients (36%), and included: abdominal pain (three patients), nausea and vomiting (one patient), and oral candidiasis (one patient); no patient abandoned the treatment due to adverse effects. CONCLUSION: Rifabutin-based rescue therapy constitutes an encouraging strategy after multiple previous eradication failures with key antibiotics such as amoxicillin, clarithromycin, metronidazole and tetracycline.