One of the basic therapeutic procedures in surgical intraabdominal infections is early administration of antimicrobial drugs. The basic requirement for the selection of antimicrobial drugs is a broad-spectum bactericide action with low toxicity. Within the framework of a retrospective non-comparative investigation the action of the betalactam antibiotic piperacillin combined with the betalactamase inhibitor tazobactam was tested which was used in the initial empirical antimicrobial treatment of 33 patients with intraabdominal infectious complications caused by perforation of the large bowel or dehiscence of the anastomosis on the large intestine or rectum. Twenty-eight patients developed diffuse inflammation of the peritoneum (caused by perforation of a diverticulum in 17, by dehiscence of the anastomosis on the large intestine and rectum after resection on account of carcinoma in 7, by a penetrating injury of the large bowel and rectum in 3 and by postirradiation necrosis of the rectum in one female patient). Five patients developed an intraabdominal abscess as a complication of diverticulitis of the large intestine or as a postoperative infectious complication after resection of the large bowel and rectum. All patients were operated (resection of the large bowel according to Hartmann, or stoma above the site of injury or dehiscence of the intestinal anastomosis or drainage of the abscess). After surgery administration of piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g, subsequently after 8 hours). The period of administration was on average 8 days (5 to 11 days). After surgery the contents of the peritoneal cavity were collected for bacteriological examination incl. evaluation of the sensitivity of the isolated bacteria to piperacillin/tazebactam. From the isolated pathogens 58% were Gram-negative aerobic bacteria, in 24% anaerobic bacteria and in 18% enterococci. In 3 patients antimicrobial treatment was because of resistance of isolated bacteria to piperacillin/tazobactam (Klebsiella species, Pseudomonas aeruginosa) combined with aminoglycosides (amikacin, netilmicin). Postoperative complications developed in 9 patients (27%), incl. 3 who died (9%). In patients with intraabdominal infection caused by perforation of the large bowel and rectum or dehiscence of the anastomosis after resection of the large bowel and rectum piperacillin/tazobactam is the antibiotic of choice for the initial empirical antimicrobial treatment on account of its great efficacy against the majority of isolated bacteria, its safety and low toxicity.