The natural susceptibility of 102 Proteus mirabilis and 35 Proteus penneri strains to 71 antibiotics was examined. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined by applying a microdilution procedure in IsoSensitest broth (for all strains) and cation-adjusted Mueller Hinton broth (for some strains). P. mirabilis and P. penneri were naturally resistant to penicillin G, oxacillin, all tested macrolides, lincosamides, streptogramins, glycopeptides, rifampicin and fusidic acid. Both species were uniformly, naturally sensitive to all tested aminoglycosides, acylureidopenicillins, some cephalosporins, carbapenems, aztreonam, quinolones, sulfamethoxazole and co-trimoxazole. Species-specific differences in natural susceptibility affecting clinical assessment criteria were seen with tetracyclines, several beta-lactams, chloramphenicol and nitrufurantoin. P. mirabilis was naturally resistant to all tested tetracyclines, and was naturally sensitive to all beta-lactams, except penicillin G and oxacillin. Strains of P. penneri were naturally sensitive or of intermediate susceptibility to tetracyclines, and naturally resistant to amoxicillin (but sensitive or of intermediate susceptibility to aminopenicillins in the presence of beta-lactamase inhibitors) and some cephalosporins (i.e. cefaclor, cefazoline, loracarbef, cefuroxime, cefotiam, and cefdinir). P. penneri was less susceptible than P. mirabilis to chloramphenicol; P. mirabilis was less susceptible than P. penneri to nitrofurantoin. Major medium-dependent influences on the MICs were seen with fosfomycin. The present study describes a database concerning the natural antibiotic susceptibility of P. mirabilis and P. penneri strains to a range of antibiotics, which can be applied to validate forthcoming antibiotic susceptibility tests of these bacteria. It was shown that ten of fifteen amoxicillin-sensitive P. mirabilis strains produced beta-lactamases at a low level, supporting the thesis of the presence of a naturally-occurring beta-lactamase in this species. Natural susceptibility patterns are compared with those of a recent study, dealing with natural susceptibilities of species of the P. vulgaris complex.