IL-12 modulates T cell responses between helper T cells Th2 and Th1; however, the therapeutic potential of IL-12 for allergic diseases either directly or as an adjuvant in allergen therapy has been controversial. The role of intranasal IL-12 as an adjuvant in modulating the grass pollen allergen (GAL) therapy-induced systemic immune response and lung-specific inflammation and airway reactivity was examined in this study using a mouse model of established allergic asthma. The effects of intranasal or nebulized IL-12 with or without intranasal anti-IFN-gamma antibody were examined in groups of control and allergen-sensitized or -challenged mice. T cell cytokine patterns, antibody response profiles, pulmonary inflammation and airway reactivity were examined. Intranasal IL-12 was found to be more effective in the Th2-Th1 shifting of immune response and anti-inflammatory activity in the lung compared to nebulized IL-12 at the given doses. Intranasal IL-12 significantly decreased production of IFN-gamma, eotaxin and LTC4/D4/E4 in the lung and decreased eosinophil infiltration, resulting in attenuated airway hyper-responsiveness in GAL-sensitized (GS) mice. In contrast, intranasal IL-12 significantly increased IFN-gamma production in the thoracic lymph node cultures and decreased the IL-5/IFN-gamma ratio, suggesting a Th2-Th1 shift. Also, intranasal IL-12 increased GAL-specific IgG2a antibody response, while the IgE response remained unaffected. The systemic effects of IL-12 were IFN-gamma dependent. IL-12 induces differential expression of its own receptor beta1 and beta2 subunits in the lung tissues to augment IL-12 responsiveness. Together, these results demonstrate that intranasal IL-12 is effective in shifting the systemic immune response in the direction of Th1 in IFN-gamma-dependent manner, while decreasing pulmonary inflammation and airway reactivity independent of IFN-gamma. Thus, intranasal delivery of IL-12 may provide an approach for the treatment of asthma and may be useful as an adjuvant in local nasal immunotherapy (IT) and in asthma.