In order to assess the epidemiological, microbiological, and clinical features of cellulitis and soft tissue infection occurring during the course of HIV disease, clinical and laboratory data of 2221 hospitalizations carried out since 1991 were retrospectively examined, and 67 bacteriologically-proven episodes of cellulitis-soft tissue infection were identified (3.02% of overall admissions). Among the 92 cultured pathogens, Staphylococcus aureus was the most frequent (46 cases), followed by Pseudomonas spp., Escherichia coli, and Streptococcus pyogenes; 38.1% of patients had a polymicrobial infection. i.v. drug use (p<.02) and the male gender (p<.05), were significantly associated with the occurrence of these complications, while a great variation in the severity of underlying immunodeficiency was shown. An elevated rate (83.6%) of episodes of cellulitis or soft tissue infection were community-acquired in origin; the comprehensive frequency of these episodes significantly dropped during the highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) era (p<.01). Limbs were involved in over 80% of episodes, and an hematogenous dissemination of bacterial infection (which occurred in 25.4% of cases), proved significantly related to a CD4+ lymphocyte count <100 cells/microL (p<.03), and an absolute neutrophil count <1000 cells/microL (p<.05). S. aureus strains showed an elevated in vitro resistance rate to penicillin, ampicillin, and rifampin, and a 21.7% rate of methicillin-resistance, while among the 29 gram-negative microorganisms, resistance to ampicillin and first-generation cephalosporins, and that to amoxycillin-clavulanate and second-generation cephalosporin, occurred in over 90% and 60% of tested strains, respectively. All episodes of HIV-associated cellulitis and soft tissue infection were favorably treated in 5-16 days, in over 60% of cases with associated beta-lactam and aminoglycoside antibiotics; a recurrence of staphylococcal cellulitis occurred in 4 patients only, 6-17 months after the initial episode. Cellulitis and soft tissue infection are underestimated complications of HIV disease, but they have a broad etiological and clinical spectrum, are predominantly community-acquired, and are responsible for an appreciable morbidity, due to the supporting role of i.v. drug addiction, and the frequent hematogenous dissemination (which proved to be significantly related to the progression of immunodeficiency and underlying disease). The frequent polymicrobial etiology requires a combination antimicrobial therapy (to be guided by in vitro susceptibility studies), which may avoid a complicated and recurrent disease course in the great majority of cases.