The dermal glands of frogs produce antimicrobial peptides that protect the skin against noxious microorganisms and assist in wound repair. The sequences of these peptides are very dissimilar, both within and between species, so that the 5000 living anuran frogs may produce approximately 100 000 different antimicrobial peptides. The antimicrobial peptides of South American hylid frogs are derived from precursors, the preprodermaseptins, whose signal peptides and intervening sequences are remarkably conserved, but their C-terminal domains are markedly diverse, resulting in mature peptides with different lengths, sequences and antimicrobial spectra. We have used the extreme conservation in the preproregion of preprodermaseptin transcripts to identify new members of this family in Australian and South American hylids. All these peptides are cationic, amphipathic and alpha-helical. They killed a broad spectrum of microorganisms and acted in synergy. 42 preprodermaseptin gene sequences from 10 species of hylid and ranin frogs were analyzed in the context of their phylogeny and biogeography and of geophysical models for the fragmentation of Gondwana to examine the strategy that these frogs have evolved to generate an enormous array of peptide antibiotics. The hyperdivergence of modern antimicrobial peptides and the number of peptides per species result from repeated duplications of a approximately 150-million-year-old ancestral gene and accelerated mutations of the mature peptide domain, probably involving a mutagenic, error-prone, DNA polymerase similar to Escherichia coli Pol V. The presence of antimicrobial peptides with such different structures and spectra of action represents the successful evolution of multidrug defense by providing frogs with maximum protection against infectious microbes and minimizing the chance of microorganisms developing resistance to individual peptides. The hypermutation of the antimicrobial domain by a targeted mutagenic polymerase that can generate many sequence changes in a few steps may have a selective survival value when frogs colonizing a new ecological niche encounter different microbial predators.