The present study aimed to isolate, select, and evaluate bacterial isolates with potential for use as biological indicators for sterilization with glutaraldehyde and/or formaldehyde. A total of 340 local Bacillus isolates were screened for glutaraldehyde and/or formaldehyde resistance by determination of minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs), minimum bactericidal concentrations (MBCs), and extinction time and were compared with B. subtilis (var. niger) ATCC 9372, the biological indicator for ethylene oxide sterilization, as reference. Of these, 85 isolates had glutaraldehyde MICs of 0.5% or higher, while 29 had formaldehyde MICs of 0.04% or higher. Of the 29 resistant isolates, 15 had MBCs of 0.05% or more. Extinction times were used to evaluate the bactericidal/sporicidal activity of glutaraldehyde. Eight had inactivation times of more than 5 h in 2% glutaraldehyde (pH 8), whereas 12 had inactivation times of more than 3 h in l% formaldehyde, with one isolate in common. These 19 isolates were selected and evaluated as potential biological indicators for aldehydes by determination of the decimal reduction times ( D values), compared with the reference strain. Eight glutaraldehyde-resistant isolates exhibited D values 2.0- to 3.5-fold higher than the reference strain (30 min.). Only five of 12 formaldehyde resistant isolates had D values higher than that of the reference strain. Using six resistant isolates, temperature coefficient values between 2.11 and 3.02 were obtained for 2% formaldehyde. Finally, 14 isolates were tested for potential pathogenicity and were identified to species level. All of the eight glutaraldehyde-resistant isolates, including the isolate with dual resistance, and three formaldehyde-resistant isolates were B. licheniformis, while two other formaldehyde-resistant isolates were B. cereus. Six of the selected B. licheniformis isolates are potential biological indicators for sterilization processes using aldehydes. Three can be suggested for glutaraldehyde only and three for both aldehydes.