INTRODUCTION: This study investigated utilization of antibacterial agents at the Ear, Nose and Throat Department of the Outpatient Service of the Health Center Novi Sad-Liman and at the Ear, Nose and Throat Clinic of the Clinical Center Novi Sad, in the period February-March 2001. MATERIAL AND METHODS: All antibacterial agents were classified as group J, regarding Anatomic-Therapeutic-Chemical Classification. Data on drug utilization were presented in Defined Daily Doses (DDD). Patients who were under observation were all treated with antibiotics. RESULTS: In regard to prescribed treatment in the Ear, Nose and Throat Department of the Outpatient Service of the Health Center Novi Sad-Liman, most outpatients were treated with macrolide antibiotics--in 26.21%; combination of penicillin and beta-lactamase inhibitors in 20.83% and pyranosides in 16.12%. At the Ear, Nose and Throat Clinic of the Clinical Center Novi Sad, macrolides and lincosamines were most frequently used--in 20.46%; cephalosporins in 19.87% and penicillins susceptible to beta-lactamase in 18.85%. It is extremely positive and in agreement with current pharmacotherapeutic principles that in both institutions peroral ampicillins have not been prescribed. Aminoglycosides have been prescribed in less than 1% of patients of the Ear, Nose and Throat Department of the Outpatient Service of the Health Center Novi Sad-Liman, whereas they were much more frequently prescribed at the Ear, Nose and Throat Clinic of the Clinical Center Novi Sad--in 11.25%. Although there is a positive postantibiotic effect in regard to these antibiotics and it is recommended to use them once a day, in both examined institutions aminoglycosides were given twice a day. In regard to bacterial identification it was done in 80.76% of patients of the Ear, Nose and Throat Department of the Outpatient Service of the Health Center Novi Sad-Liman, while in the Ear, Nose and Throat Clinic of the Clinical Center Novi Sad it was done only in 32.42%. CONCLUSIONS: Although treatment performed on empirical basis and clinical findings is usually correct, a greater percentage of antibiotic prescriptions should be confirmed by antibiograms providing optimal therapy and decreased degree of resistance.