BACKGROUND & AIMS: Current knowledge of the potential effects that several dietary lipids exert on immune functions indicates that these substances participate actively in the modulation of immune system by which they contribute to the improvement of the conditions of patients suffering from inflammatory disorders. However, long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids induce an immunosuppressive status that leads to a reduction of the host natural resistance to infectious agents as well as to an enhancement of oxidative damage. Hence, the present study has been designed to evaluate the effects on the immune system of the antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) in mice fed dietary lipids and infected with Listeria monocytogenes. METHODS: Balb/c mice were fed for 4 weeks with diets containing either olive oil (OO, 20% by weight), fish oil (FO, 20% by weight) or hydrogenated coconut oil (HCO, 20% by weight). After dietary lipid administration mice were experimentally infected with L. monocytogenes or treated with NAC (25mg/ml intraperitoneally). RESULTS: NAC at a concentration of 1mM promoted a loss of cell viability, although no differences were observed among the four groups. After injection of NAC in combination with L. monocytogenes, 25% of mice fed a low-fat (LF) diet survived. However, in the groups fed dietary lipids no effect on survival of mice was found. NAC participated in the reduction of superoxide anion generation measured with nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) in the group fed a FO diet. Finally, NAC reduced the recovery of L. monocytogenes from spleen of mice fed diets containing LF or HCO. CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of these results, we can confirm that the administration of NAC improves survival in mice fed LF diet, whereas a reduction in the generation of superoxide radicals was measured in mice fed a FO diet and infected with L. monocytogenes. Similarly, bacterial recovery was diminished in mice fed diets containing LF or HCO. Hence, these data reveal a beneficial effect of NAC in mice fed LF or HCO and a detrimental action of this antioxidant in mice fed diets containing FO or OO.