BACKGROUND: Contaminated surfaces can act as a reservoir for pathogenic microorganisms and potentially exacerbate the risk of infection. Surface disinfection and decontamination provide temporary amelioration against bacterial colonization. Disinfected surfaces eventually become contaminated, thus, mitigating the benefit of the initial disinfection. It is hypothesized that to improve on the current state of the art, a disinfectant should not only immediately disinfect a surface but also provide persistent antimicrobial action after the product has been applied. We describe here a silver-based disinfectant technology designed to provide long-lasting sanitization and disinfection to treated surfaces as evaluated on hard surfaces after repeated environmental insults. METHODS: A comparative evaluation of 6 disinfectant formulations for residual antimicrobial activity after water rinsing was performed. Log reduction of bacterial populations on disinfectant-treated substrates were measured after 30 minutes to 8 hours of exposure and compared with an untreated control. In a similar study, the residual antimicrobial activity of a silver disinfectant was evaluated against antibiotic- and biocide-resistant bacteria also after water rinsing. Further, residual antimicrobial activity of the silver disinfectant was measured after 5 cycles of rinsing, abrasion, and contamination against representative household and nosocomial pathogens (Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter aerogenes, Enterococcus faecium, or Salmonella choleraesuis) after 10-minute exposure times. RESULTS: In the comparative assay, only the silver disinfectant and a persistent quaternary ammonium compound disinfectant demonstrated significant residual activity (> or =3.0 log(10) reduction to control) against S aureus whereas only the silver disinfectant demonstrated activity against Pseudomonas. No residual activity (< or = 0.5 log reduction to untreated control) was observed for the other disinfectant products. The silver-based disinfectant also showed significant and equivalent efficacy against antibiotic- and silver-resistant bacteria. In addition, the silver disinfectant was able to achieve significant residual activity in 10 minutes against all organisms tested after 1, 3, and 5 cycles of water rinse, abrasion, and microbial contamination. CONCLUSIONS: The findings show the ability of a new silver-based disinfectant to reduce bacterial populations that contact treated surfaces within minutes, highlight the potential to interrupt cross-contamination from environmental surfaces, and reduce the risk of infection within the home and health care settings.