INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE: Urinary tract infection is the most common cause of nosocomial infections in patients hospitalized in chronic care facilities. The changing spectrum of microorganisms involved in urinary tract infections and the emerging resistance require continuous monitoring to provide crucial information to guide empirical therapy and encourage prudent use of antibiotics. The aim of this survey was to assess the antimicrobial resistance profile of urine isolates from patients hospitalized in a geriatric hospital and from elderly patients hospitalized in an acute care hospital in order to guide empirical therapy of urinary tract infections. METHODS: The survey was performed in two hospitals in Jerusalem: a university-affiliated geriatric hospital- Herzog -and an acute secondary- and tertiary-care university hospital- Hadassah. We performed a retrospective analysis of antimicrobial resistance of all positive urine cultures obtained from patients in the geriatric division of Herzog Hospital and from patients aged 65 years and older hospitalized in the Internal Medicine departments in Hadassah Hospital during a 1-year period. RESULTS: The most common bacteria isolated from urine specimens in Herzog Hospital were, in order of frequency, Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We demonstrated a high rate of antimicrobial resistance of those bacteria in both hospitals. The pattern we observed necessitates recommending ceftazidime as the most appropriate empirical therapy for urinary tract infection in Herzog Hospital. In Hadassah Hospital we recommend cefuroxime for those patients in good general condition and ceftazidime for those who present with clinical sepsis. Antimicrobial resistance patterns should be assessed periodically and recommendations modified accordingly. Infection control guidelines should be implemented in order to try to decrease the rate of antimicrobial resistance. Further research is requested to assess the efficacy of such interventions in long-term care facilities.