Complicated skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs) remain a common reason for hospitalisation. Optimal management of complicated SSTIs begins with a physical examination, and obtaining the complete social and medical history of the patient. Empirical intravenous antibacterial therapy is guided by expected pathogens, patient factors and diagnostic procedure reports, such as the Gram-stained smear of discharge or exudates. The majority of community-acquired SSTIs are caused by Staphylococcus aureus and beta-haemolytic streptococci. On the basis of recent surveillance data, 80-90% of these pathogens remain susceptible to cefazolin or oxacillin. Consequently, a first generation cephalosporin or an antistaphylococcal penicillin remains the first line empirical therapy for community-acquired skin and soft tissue infections. Vancomycin may be an appropriate alternative when vancomycin-resistant S. aureus is highly suspected on the basis of patient history and co-morbid conditions. With the global emergence and spread of macrolide-resistant S. aureus and beta-haemolytic streptococci, clindamycin rather than a macrolide is the recommended agent for empirical antibacterial therapy of community-acquired SSTIs in penicillin-allergic patients. Nosocomial complicated SSTIs are predominantly caused by S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterococcus spp., Escherichia coli and other Enterobacteriaceae. Piperacillin/tazobactam with or without vancomycin is the preferred agent for empirical treatment depending on local resistance statistics. The newer fluoroquinolones may have a role in the treatment of complicated SSTIs, especially in penicillin-allergic patients. More clinical studies are needed before a formal recommendation can be made. Many of the newer antimicrobial agents such as the carbapenems, oxazolidinones and streptogramins have been shown to be effective for the treatment of complicated SSTIs. However, because of their proven activity against highly resistant organisms including methicillin-resistant S. aureus and vancomycin-resistant enterococci (oxazolidinones and streptogramins), and Gram-negative bacilli producing extended spectrum beta-lactamases (carbapenems), these antibacterials should be reserved for life-threatening situations and/or when resistant pathogens are suspected. Complicated skin and soft tissue infections are often associated with exudates, ulcerations, fluid collections or abscesses. Adequate debridement of devitalized tissues and drainage of abscesses and fluid collections in addition to systemic antibacterial therapy is an integral part of appropriate management.