Bacterial meningitis is still a major cause of death and disability in children worldwide. With the advent of conjugate vaccines against the three major pathogens, the burden of disease is increasingly concentrated in developing countries that cannot afford the vaccines. Antibiotic resistance is an increasing problem; in developed countries, high-level resistance to beta-lactams among Streptococcus pneumoniae necessitates the addition of vancomycin to third-generation cephalosporins. In many developing countries, the problems are more fundamental. Increasing resistance of S. pneumoniae to penicillin and chloramphenicol and of Haemophilus influenzae to chloramphenicol means that many children with bacterial meningitis receive ineffective treatments, as third-generation cephalosporins are often unavailable or unaffordable. Case fatality rates are as high as 50% and neurological sequelae occur in one-third of survivors. The use of corticosteroids in meningitis is controversial; the evidence that they protect against neurological complications of childhood meningitis (particularly severe hearing loss) is strongest when: meningitis is caused by H. influenzae type b; dexamethasone is given before the first dose of antibiotics; a bactericidal antibiotic such as a third-generation cephalosporin is used; and in the early stages of the infection. There are few controlled clinical trials on which to base recommendations about other adjuvant therapy for meningitis. Avoidance of secondary brain injury from hypoxia, hypotension, hypo-osmolarity and cerebral oedema, hypoglycaemia or convulsions is essential for a good outcome. The problem of bacterial meningitis will only be solved if protein-conjugate vaccines (or other effective vaccine strategies) against S. pneumonia, H. influenzae and epidemic strains of Neisseria meningitidis are available to all the world's children. Making third-generation cephalosporins affordable in the developing world is also a necessary intervention, but better antibiotics will not overcome the problems of poor access to hospitals and late presentation with established brain injury, and will inevitably bring further pressure for antimicrobial resistance.