Abstract Acinetobacter baumannii is the most common nosocomial pathogen among all Acinetobacter spp. A. baumannii tend to be resistant to multiple antibiotics, and represent a severe threat in the treatment of hospitalized patients. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the prevalence, biotyping, and antibiotic resistance status of A. baumannii isolates recovered from submitted hospital clinical specimens. The in-vitro activity of 29 currently used antimicrobial agents was studied in 180 isolates of A. baumannii. The prevalence was higher in wound exudates (32%) and urine samples (22%) than in other specimens. Forty-six percent of the isolates were of biotype 9. The evolution of resistance from November 1996 through October 1998 was studied. More than 75% of the isolates were multidrug resistant (MDR) and more than 70% were #-lactamase producers. Amikacin, ampicillin + sulbactam, and imipenem are still effective antimicrobial agents, but a steady rise in the values of the minimum inhibitory concentration at which 50% of the isolates were inhibited (MIC50 )and MIC90 was observed. Resistance to aztreonam (60%), enrofloxacin (60%), imipenem (29%), moxalactam (73%), and sparfloxacin (25%) was noted; enrofloxacin and sparfloxacin are not generally used in this hospital. From the findings of the present study, no single drug appears to be suitable for empirical therapy for this nosocomial pathogen. Abstract Acinetobacter baumannii is the most common nosocomial pathogen among all Acinetobacter spp. A. baumannii tend to be resistant to multiple antibiotics, and represent a severe threat in the treatment of hospitalized patients. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the prevalence, biotyping, and antibiotic resistance status of A. baumannii isolates recovered from submitted hospital clinical specimens. The in-vitro activity of 29 currently used antimicrobial agents was studied in 180 isolates of A. baumannii. The prevalence was higher in wound exudates (32%) and urine samples (22%) than in other specimens. Forty-six percent of the isolates were of biotype 9. The evolution of resistance from November 1996 through October 1998 was studied. More than 75% of the isolates were multidrug resistant (MDR) and more than 70% were #-lactamase producers. Amikacin, ampicillin + sulbactam, and imipenem are still effective antimicrobial agents, but a steady rise in the values of the minimum inhibitory concentration at which 50% of the isolates were inhibited (MIC50) and MIC90 was observed. Resistance to aztreonam (60%), enrofloxacin (60%), imipenem (29%), moxalactam (73%), and sparfloxacin (25%) was noted; enrofloxacin and sparfloxacin are not generally used in this hospital. From the findings of the present study, no single drug appears to be suitable for empirical therapy for this nosocomial pathogen.