AIMS: To examine the factors influencing post-operative wound infections, such as the patient's age, sex, type and duration of surgical procedure, length of hospital stay, and the type of antibiotic prophylaxis used. In addition, to examine the level of nurses' and physicians' knowledge and application of aseptic technique procedures pre-operatively, peri-operatively and post-operatively. METHOD: The study was conducted between 1997 and 1999 at two major hospitals in Greece. One hundred and twenty six (n = 126) patients and 90 (n = 90) healthcare professionals (74 nurses and 16 physicians) were included in the study. Healthcare participants were interviewed and completed questionnaires that were designed to measure demographics, experience, infection control training and education, staffing levels, perceived deficits, and managerial support. RESULTS: The study showed that there was a high rate of infection (17.5 per cent) in both hospitals with more predominance in the male population (p < 0.05). The length of hospital stay and type of surgical procedure were found to be significant factors in infection. In addition, the lack of awareness of aseptic techniques among nurses and physicians in several practice areas, despite the availability of a large number of relevant and well-established research findings and guidance, was also found to be significant. The duration of the operation was found to be correlated with infection (R = 0.208, p < 0.01). Emergency surgical procedures were more susceptible to infection (p = 0.08) than scheduled procedures. The results will provide hospital administrators with strategic goals and actions that might have a significant impact on reducing infection outbreaks following surgery. CONCLUSION: Continuous education of all healthcare professionals in basic infection control procedures, policies and new information on antimicrobial resistance is recommended to increase detection and identification of surgical wound infections. A follow-up study should be conducted to measure the improvement in the use of aseptic techniques by both nurses and physicians.