Like human immunodeficiency virus infection of humans, infection of rhesus macaques with pathogenic simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) strains typically results in persistent progressive infection, leading to clinically significant immunosuppression. In previous studies, we administered short term anti-retroviral treatment, shortly after intravenous inoculation with SIVsmE660, in an effort to allow immunologic sensitization under conditions not characterized by overwhelming cytopathic infection compromising the developing immune response. We showed that such treatment allowed control of off treatment viremia and was associated with resistance to rechallenge. Control of off treatment viremia was associated, at least in part, with CD8+ lymphocytes, based on in vivo CD8 depletion studies. In the present study, six rhesus macaques were infected intravenously with 100 MID50 of SIVmac239; four then received 30 days of treatment with tenofovir 9-[2-(R)-(phosphonomethoxy)propyl]adenine (PMPA); 20-30 mg/kg, subcutaneously) starting 24 hours post-inoculation. Tenofovir-treated animals showed low (<500 copy Eq/ml) or undetectable (<100 copy Eq/ml) plasma SIV RNA levels during treatment, with undetectable plasma viremia following discontinuation of treatment. Plasma SIV RNA remained <100 copy Eq/ml, even after depletion of CD8+ lymphocytes, 6 weeks after discontinuation of tenofovir treatment. In contrast to untreated infected control animals that showed substantial depletion of CD4+ T cells from gut-associated lymphoid tissues (GALT), tenofovir-treated animals showed sparing of GALT CD4+ T cells both during the treatment period and in the off treatment follow-up period. However, in contrast to earlier results with animals infected with SIVsmE660, in the present study, the animals did not develop readily measurable cellular anti-SIV immune responses, and did not resist homologous rechallenge with SIVmac239, administered 44 weeks after the initial infection. Differences in the animals and virus strains employed may in part account for the differences in results observed. Comparative analysis of virologic and immunologic parameters in this model system may provide important insights for understanding the basis of effective immunologic control of SIV infection.