BACKGROUND: The multidrug transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is expressed in HIV-1 target cells, in a range of pharmacological barriers and in AIDS-associated tumours. P-gp substrates include HIV-1 protease inhibitors (PIs) and anticancer drugs, which are efficiently effluxed from multidrug-resistant (MDR) cells. OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect on human CD4 T-lymphoblastoid CEMrev cells of saquinavir and other PIs in terms of P-gp expression and to characterize the functional and biochemical patterns of PI-induced P-gp molecules. METHODS: CEMrev cells no longer expressing detectable amounts of P-gp were cultured for a prolonged period in the presence of 10 microg/mL saquinavir (CEMsaq10) and tested for P-gp expression and function. Subsequently, CEMsaq10 cells were transferred into medium containing 15 microg/mL saquinavir (CEMsaq15) and cultured for several months. These cell lines were continuously monitored for P-gp expression, function and immunochemical patterns. A similar strategy was adopted to determine whether other PIs, such as ritonavir and indinavir, were able to induce P-gp expression in CEMrev cells. RESULTS: Compared with the drug-diluent control, the exposure of CEMrev cells to 10 microg/mL saquinavir induced, in a consistent fraction of cells (45-50%), de novo expression of functioning P-gp molecules. The transfer of CEMsaq10 cells to 15 microg/mL saquinavir was associated with a dramatic increase in P-gp expression and function (85-90% of CEMsaq15 cells expressed P-gp and effluxed P-gp dye substrates). These saquinavir-induced P-gp molecules included 75-kDa molecules as well as the classical 170-kDa form of P-gp, suggesting induction of a particular isoform of P-gp termed mini-P-glycoprotein. Conversely, ritonavir and indinavir induced transient P-gp expression in a small percentage of the CEMrev cells. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of human CD4 T-lymphoblastoid CEMrev cells with saquinavir caused over-expression of functioning P-gp molecules. This de novo acquired MDR phenotype, which differed from that induced by other PIs, was stable, as expression and activity of P-gp were observed in CEMsaq10 and CEMsaq15 cells during prolonged in vitro culturing, even in drug-free conditions.