Despite extensive national and international intervention, little progress has been made in controlling, malaria and other communicable diseases afflicting many developing countries in the world. In response to the need to pursue and enhance investigation, the French Ministry of Research launched the PAL+ program in 1999 with the purpose of promoting concerted "research on malaria and other communicable diseases afflicting developing countries". The program is focused on developing methods of prevention and treatment for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, and Latin America. Advancement of these scientific goals is further by a determined efforts (i) to provide means for national coordination and scientific organization of malaria research in France and (ii) to revive the spirit and mechanisms that characterized previous operations of cooperation between France and countries in the southern hemisphere. This new vision of cooperation is based on two organizational approaches. The first involves integrated programs in which training and transfer of knowledge are essential. The second involves joint projects in which networks maintained by a continuous exchange in operational seminars contribute to establishing a permanent dialogue between the North and South. Priority research areas have been encouraged to respond to specific public health issues with emphasis on establishing a balance between work in the field and development of knowledge. The priority areas include (i) responding to the increasing incidence of drug resistance by identifying of new antimalarial drugs and defining new therapeutic strategies; (ii) understanding the implications of the pathophysiology and physiopathology mechanisms underlying severe malaria manifestations for development of a malaria vaccine; (iii) finding new opportunities for prevention of malaria based on more effective vector control; (iv) using social anthropology to factor population behaviour and habits into the design of effective malaria control measures. The PAL+ program was founded on a commitment to provide participating countries with the means necessary to improve their research capability and to coordinate and structure scientific research by creating enduring partnerships between investigators in France and southern hemisphere countries. For this purpose the PAL+ workshop program involving regular encounters between northern and southern hemisphere researchers has been set up to encourage discussion, interaction, and multidisciplinary projects. The exceptionally instructive impact of these workshops has proven to be an essential element in the overall PAL+ program that has greatly stimulated malaria research. This program has been successful in creating a new spirit of intervention and has provided a rarely equalled vehicle for collaboration. By bringing the whole research community together over the major research programs now under way in the North/South networks, the PAL+ program represents a new and decisive step in achieving the long-sought goal of meaningful scientific cooperation between northern and southern hemisphere countries in the domain of public health.