BACKGROUND: Our previous study using genetically labeled Escherichia coli strain JNW14 revealed that obstructive jaundice promotes bacterial translocation in rats and that the absence of bile in the intestinal tract is considered to be a factor inducing bacterial translocation. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of bile and bile acids in intestinal barrier function against bacterial translocation. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eight-week-old male specific-pathogen-free Wistar rats were subjected to ligation of their common bile ducts (CBDL). The CBDL rats were treated with bacitracin, neomycin sulfate, and streptomycin sulfate, and the intestinal tract was colonized with E. coli strain JNW14, which was genetically labeled with resistant markers against the above three antibiotics, to monitor the bacterial translocation. The rats were then administered saline, cholic acid (20 mg/100 g BW), taurocholic acid (TCA: 5-50 mg/100 BW), or bile (1.5-6 mL/day) via a duodenal catheter. The degree of bacterial translocation of E. coli strain JNW14 to the mesenteric lymph nodes was compared. Histopathological examination of the terminal ileum and intestinal permeability test using phenolsulfonphthalein was also performed. RESULTS: Both cholic acid and TCA showed no inhibitory effect on bacterial translocation at any of the doses tested in CBDL rats, although TCA significantly decreased the numbers of E. coli strain JNW14 in the cecum. However, bile administration reduced the numbers of E. coli strain JNW14 in the cecum and mesenteric lymph nodes in CBDL rats although the inhibitory effect was weak. The integrity and permeability of the intestinal mucosa were kept at normal levels by bile administration in CBDL rats whereas the morphological changes, such as villous atrophy, villous edema, and lacteal canal dilatation, were observed in other CBDL rats. CONCLUSION: Bile plays an important role in maintaining the intestinal barrier function to prevent the invasion of enteric bacteria to the underlying tissues, suggesting that the intestinal administration of bile to patients with obstructive jaundice is a useful way to reduce infectious complications by inhibiting bacterial translocation from the intestine to other organs.