OBJECTIVES: This study aimed at describing the burden of malaria at delivery in a urban maternity in Senegal. We measured the prevalence of placental malaria infection. We described the association between placental malaria and low birth weight and the impact of chemoprophylaxis. STUDY AREA: Guediawaye is the most important suburb of the city of Dakar, Senegal, surrounded by a permanent marsh (niayes). Malaria in this area is hypo endemic transmission: 1 infective bite/person/year. An. arabiensis is the principal vector and P. falciparum (98%) the most frequent species. The Maternite Roi Baudoin in Guediawaye is the gynecologic and obstetrical reference centre of this area with more than 6000 deliveries/year. METHODS: We carried out an exhaustive survey from August 98 to December 99 at the maternite Roi Baudoin in Guediawaye. The socio-demographic data, the clinical data and information about prophylaxy were collected by questionnary. For each woman at delivery, one placental apposition was carried out. Presence of trophozoites or schizontes indicated malaria placental infection. RESULTS: 8310 women were included in the study. They were from 13 to 49 years old with an average age of 26.1; 28% were primigravidae. The prevalence of placental malaria infection was 8.1% (674/8310) [Ic95: 7.4-8.8%]. Schizontes were present in 80.5% of infected placenta. The prevalence was 8.8% within primigravidae group and 7.4% in the other parity groups, p = 0.28 (NS). Placental infection was present all the year long. However, there were important seasonal variations. The risk of placental infection increased during seasonal transmission (> 10%) compared to the period of low transmission (3%). The prevalence of placental malaria was lower in the group of women who declares regular chloroquine intake compared with those who declared taking no prophylaxy or irregular prophylaxy (RR = 0.78 [0.62-0.98]). The risk of low birth weight was of 1.9 [1.6-2.1] when the placenta was infected compared with non infected placenta. CONCLUSION: This study indicates that placental malaria infection is frequent in this low transmission area where more than 70% of women declared taking regular chloroquine. This observation could be explained by a resistance of P. falciparum to chloroquine or a poor observance of chemoprophylaxis.