Agar dilution MIC determination was used to compare the activity of DK-507k with those of ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, sitafloxacin, amoxicillin, cefuroxime, erythromycin, azithromycin, and clarithromycin against 113 penicillin-susceptible, 81 penicillin-intermediate, and 67 penicillin-resistant pneumococci (all quinolone susceptible). DK-507k and sitafloxacin had the lowest MICs of all quinolones against quinolone-susceptible strains (MIC at which 50% of isolates were inhibited [MIC50] and MIC90 of both, 0.06 and 0.125 microg/ml, respectively), followed by moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, and ciprofloxacin. MICs of beta-lactams and macrolides rose with those of penicillin G. Against 26 quinolone-resistant pneumococci with known resistance mechanisms, DK-507k and sitafloxacin were also the most active quinolones (MICs, 0.125 to 1.0 microg/ml), followed by moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, and ciprofloxacin. Mutations in quinolone resistance-determining regions of quinolone-resistant strains were in the usual regions of the parC and gyrA genes. Time-kill testing showed that both DK-507k and sitafloxacin were bactericidal against all 12 quinolone-susceptible and -resistant strains tested at twice the MIC at 24 h. Serial broth passages in subinhibitory concentrations of 10 strains for a minimum of 14 days showed that development of resistant mutants (fourfold or greater increase in the original MIC) occurred most rapidly for ciprofloxacin, followed by moxifloxacin, DK-507k, gatifloxacin, sitafloxacin, and levofloxacin. All parent strains demonstrated a fourfold or greater increase in initial MIC in <50 days. MICs of DK-507k against resistant mutants were lowest, followed by those of sitafloxacin, moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and levofloxacin. Four strains were subcultured in subinhibitory concentrations of each drug for 50 days: MICs of DK-507k against resistant mutants were lowest, followed by those of sitafloxacin, moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, and ciprofloxacin. Exposure to DK-507k and sitafloxacin resulted in mutations, mostly in gyrA.