The antibacterial activities of DK-507k, a novel quinolone, were compared with those of other quinolones: ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, sitafloxacin, and garenoxacin (BMS284756). DK-507k was as active as sitafloxacin and was as active as or up to eightfold more active than gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, and garenoxacin against Streptococcus pneumoniae, methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, and coagulase-negative staphylococci. DK-507k was as active as or 4-fold more active than garenoxacin and 2- to 16-fold more active than gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin against ciprofloxacin-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae, including clinical isolates and in vitro-selected mutants with known mutations. DK-507k inhibited all ciprofloxacin-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae at 1 microg/ml. A time-kill assay with S. pneumoniae showed that DK-507k was more bactericidal than gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin. The activities of DK-507k against most members of the family Enterobacteriaceae were comparable to those of ciprofloxacin and equal to or up to 32-fold higher than those of gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and garenoxacin. DK-507k was fourfold less active than sitafloxacin and ciprofloxacin against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, while it was two to four times more potent than levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, and garenoxacin against P. aeruginosa. In vivo, intravenous treatment with DK-507k was more effective than that with gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin against systemic infections caused by S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, and P. aeruginosa in mice. In a mouse model of pneumonia due to penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae, DK-507k administered subcutaneously showed dose-dependent efficacy and eliminated the bacteria from the lungs, whereas gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin had no significant efficacy. Oral treatment with DK-507k was slightly more effective than that with ciprofloxacin in a rat model of foreign body-associated urinary tract infection caused by a P. aeruginosa isolate for which the MIC of DK-507k was fourfold higher than that of ciprofloxacin. Oral administration of DK-507k to rats achieved higher peak concentrations in serum and higher concentrations in cumulative urine than those achieved with ciprofloxacin. These data indicate the potential advantages of DK-507k over other quinolones for the treatment of a wide range of community-acquired infections.