AIM: To compare the short-term (7-day) safety and efficacy of two triple-therapy regimens using pantoprazole with those of two dual-therapy regimens (one with pantoprazole and one without), for Helicobacter pylori eradication in patients with peptic ulcer disease. METHODS: H. pylori infection was identified by rapid urease (CLOtest), and confirmed by histology and culture. Patients were enrolled into one of two randomized, double-blind, multicenter, parallel-group studies. In study A, patients received oral pantoprazole 40 mg, clarithromycin 500 mg, and metronidazole 500 mg (PCM); pantoprazole, clarithromycin and amoxicillin 1000 mg (PCA); or pantoprazole and clarithromycin (PC). In study B, patients received PCM, PCA, PC, or clarithromycin and metronidazole without pantoprazole (CM). Treatments were given twice daily for 7 days. H. pylori status after therapy was assessed by histology and culture at 4 weeks after completing the course of study treatment. Modified intent-to-treat (MITT; each study: n = 424, n = 512) and per-protocol (PP; each study: n = 371, n = 454) populations were analyzed. The MITT population comprised all patients whose positive H. pylori status was confirmed by culture and histology; the PP population comprised patients who also complied with > or = 85% of study medication doses. RESULTS: A total of 1016 patients were enrolled. Cure rates among patients with clarithromycin-susceptible H. pylori strains were 82 and 86% for PCM, and 72 and 71% for PCA, in studies A and B, respectively. Cure rates among patients with metronidazole-susceptible H. pylori strains were 82 and 87% for PCM, and 71 and 69% for PCA, in studies A and B, respectively. The combined eradication rates observed with the PCM regimen were superior to those of all other regimens tested. Side-effects were infrequent and mild. CONCLUSIONS: PCM had the highest overall eradication rate in these two studies examining 7-day treatment regimens. All regimens were safe and well tolerated.