The complete nucleotide sequences of two plasmids from avian isolates of Pasteurella multocida that caused outbreaks of fowl cholera in Taiwan were determined. The entire sequences of the two plasmids, designated as pJR1 and pJR2, were 6792 bp and 5252 bp. Sequence analysis showed that the plasmid pJR1 contained six major genes: the first gene (sulII) encoded a type II sulfonamide resistant dihydropteroate synthase, the second gene (tetG) encoded a tetracycline resistance protein, the third gene (catB2) encoded a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase, the fourth gene (rep) encoded a replication protein, and the fifth and sixth genes (mbeCy and deltambeAy) encoded proteins involved in the mobilization of plasmid. The plasmid pJR2 contained five major genes: the first gene (deltaintI1) encoded a truncated form of a type I integrase, the second gene (aadA1) encoded an aminoglycoside adenylyltransferase that confers resistance to streptomycin and spectinomycin, the third gene (blaP1) encoded a beta-lactamase that confers resistance to ampicillin and carbenicillin, and the fourth and fifth genes might encode proteins involved in the plasmid replication or segregation. Sequence comparisons showed that the antibiotic resistance genes found in pJR1 and pJR2 exhibited a high degree of sequence homology to the corresponding genes found in a great variety of gram-negative bacteria, including Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica Typhimurium DT104, Psedomonas spp., P. multocida, Mannheimia spp., and Actinobacills pleuropneumoniae, which suggests that these resistance genes were disseminated in these bacteria. Although sulII and tetG genes were found previously in P. multocida or Mannheimia spp., this is the first report on the presence of catB2, aadA1, and blaP1 genes in bacteria of the family Pasturellaceae. Moreover, the aadA1 and blaP1 genes found in pJR2 were organized into an integron structure, which is a site-specific recombination system capable of capturing and mobilizing antibiotic resistance genes. This is also the first report on the presence of an integron in bacteria of the family Pasteurellaceae. The presence of a P. multocida integron might facilitate the spreading of antibiotic resistance genes between P. multocida and other gram-negative bacteria.