Recent clinical trials indicate the efficacy of interferon (IFN)-beta 1b in reducing relapse rate in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS), whereas a surge of IFN-gamma precedes and provokes acute relapses. Disruption of the cerebral endothelial barrier and transendothelial migration of inflammatory cell migration into the brain play a significant role in pathogenesis of MS and may be driven by this surge in IFN-gamma. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the beneficial effects of IFN-beta 1b against the deleterious effects of IFN-gamma on the barrier formed by the junctional proteins remain to be characterized. The authors investigated the effects of IFN-beta 1b, IFN-beta 1a, and IFN-gamma on the integrity of two endothelial junctional proteins, occludin and vascular endothelial-cadherin (VE-cadherin). Human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) layers were treated with IFN-beta 1b, IFN-beta 1a, IFN-gamma, IFN-beta 1b plus IFN-gamma, or IFN-beta 1a plus IFN-gamma. IFN-beta 1b, IFN-beta 1a, and IFN-gamma effects on occludin and VE-cadherin integrity and electrical resistance were assessed by Western blotting and immunofluorescence. IFN-gamma significantly reduced occludin expression and produced gaps in endothelial monolayers. VE-cadherin expression was decreased to a lesser extent in endothelial cells exposed to IFN-gamma. IFN-beta 1b significantly attenuated the IFN-gamma-induced decrease in occludin and VE-cadherin expression. The protective effects of IFN-beta 1a on IFN-gamma-treated endothelial cells were similar to those of IFN-beta 1b. IFN-gamma also significantly reduced endothelial monolayer electrical resistance; this effect was blocked by either IFN-beta 1a or IFN-beta 1b. IFN-beta 1a and IFN-beta 1b effectively prevent the IFN-gamma-induced disintegration of the endothelial tight junctions and sustain barrier against the effects of IFN-gamma. The protective effects of IFN-beta on occludin and VE-cadherin stability appear to represent molecular mechanisms for the therapeutic effects of the IFN-beta on blood brain barrier in MS.