BACKGROUND: Non-adherence to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) medications often results in irreparable drug resistance and poor outcomes. Hence, care providers generally think that treatment of HIV disease should be delayed until a person is 'ready' to adhere. However, little research has focused on understanding the process that results in readiness for successful adherence. AIM: The aim of this phenomenological study was to describe and understand the experience and decision-making processes of people who became adherent to their HIV medication regimens after previously failing treatment because of non-adherence. METHOD: A Husserlian phenomenological approach was taken, and in-depth interviews were analysed using Giorgi's method of phenomenological description and analysis. FINDINGS: Thirteen HIV-positive men and women who had previously failed two or more treatment regimens because of non-adherence were purposefully selected from two infectious diseases clinics in the Midwest region of the United States. They had achieved and sustained adherence to their HIV medications for 1 year or longer without formal intervention. All participants experienced a 'trigger' event preceding the process that led to the ability to incorporate lifestyle and health behaviour changes necessary for successful adherence. Factors associated with the process leading to adherence were: changing attitudes towards HIV medication, finding the right health care provider, creating the right support system, getting control of life and having goals. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that HIV-positive individuals who had been non-adherent and had been viewed as 'difficult to treat' nonetheless successfully adhered to treatment once they became 'ready'. Findings from this study implicate that readiness may be a necessary component for successful adherence, particularly in HIV-positive individuals who have previously failed treatment. Understanding the relationship between the phenomenon of readiness and subsequent HIV treatment adherence has implications for clinical decision-making and for development of interventions that enhance adherence and prevent HIV drug resistance.