Elderly patients are at increased risk of developing lower respiratory tract infections compared with younger patients. In this population, pneumonia is a serious illness with high rates of hospitalisation and mortality, especially in patients requiring admission to intensive care units (ICUs). A wide range of pathogens may be involved depending on different settings of acquisition and patient's health status. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common bacterial isolate in community-acquired pneumonia, followed by Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis and atypical pathogens such as Chlamydia pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. However, elderly patients with comorbid illness, who have been recently hospitalised or are residing in a nursing home, may develop severe pneumonia caused by multidrug resistant staphylococci or pneumococci, and enteric Gram-negative bacilli, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Moreover, anaerobes may be involved in aspiration pneumonia. Timely and appropriate empiric treatment is required in order to enhance the likelihood of a good clinical outcome, prevent the spread of antibacterial resistance and reduce the economic impact of pneumonia. International guidelines recommend that elderly outpatients and inpatients (not in ICU) should be treated for the most common bacterial pathogens and the possibility of atypical pathogens. The algorithm for therapy is to use either a selected beta-lactam combined with a macrolide (azithromycin or clarithromycin), or to use monotherapy with a new anti-pneumococcal quinolone, such as levofloxacin, gatifloxacin or moxifloxacin. Oral (amoxicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, cefuroxime axetil) and intravenous (sulbactam/ampicillin, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime) beta-lactams are agents of choice in outpatients and inpatients, respectively. For patients with severe pneumonia or aspiration pneumonia, the specific algorithm is to use either a macrolide or a quinolone in combination with other agents; the nature and the number of which depends on the presence of risk factors for specific pathogens. Despite these recommendations, clinical resolution of pneumonia in the elderly is often delayed with respect to younger patients, suggesting that optimisation of antibacterial therapy is needed. Recently, some new classes of antibacterials, such as ketolides, oxazolidinones and streptogramins, have been developed for the treatment of multidrug resistant Gram-positive infections. However, the efficacy and safety of these agents in the elderly is yet to be clarified. Treatment guidelines should be modified on the basis of local bacteriology and resistance patterns, while dosage and/or administration route of each antibacterial should be optimised on the basis of new insights on pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic parameters and drug interactions. These strategies should be able to reduce the occurrence of risk factors for a poor clinical outcome, hospitalisation and death.