We determined the antibacterial activities of oral Cephems against isolated from the patients with the respiratory infections, the urinary tract infections, and infections in the obstetrics field of an adult and a child, during the period from 2002 to 2003; Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Branhamella catarrhalis, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli of 40 strains of each, and Peptostreptococcus spp. 22 strains. S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae strains that resistant is regarded were collected mainly, penicillin-intermediate S. pneumoniae (PISP), penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae (PRSP) and beta-lactamase negative ampicillin-resistant H. influenzae (BLNAR) strains. The MICs of Cephems except cefaclor (CCL) were < or = 0.03 microgram/mL against all strains of S. pyogenes. The MICs of cefteram (CFTM) and cefditoren (CDTR) were < or = 0.0125 microgram/mL activity against 7 strains penicillin-susceptible S. pneumoniae (PSSP). However the MIC90s of cefditoren (CDTR) was 1 microgram/mL, cefteram (CFTM), and cefcapene (CFPN) were 2 micrograms/mL against PISP and PRSP, were higher than those of other drugs, but showed slightly higher than PSSP. The MIC90s of Cephems. were 0.5-4 micrograms/mL against strains of E. coli. The MIC90s of CFTM was 0.5 microgram/mL, and CDTR, CFPN were 1 microgram/mL against E. coli were higher than those of other drugs. The four strains of E. coli however were highly-resistant which MIC90s of CCL were more than 32 micrograms/mL were obtains. Furthermore it is necessary to pay much attention to the trend of resistant such as E. coli of Cephems. Although all strains showed resistant to AMPC, MIC90 of Cephems were 0.25-1 microgram/mL, good activities against K. pneumoniae. Against beta-lactamase negative ampicillin-susceptible H. influenzae (BLNAS) 23 strains the MIC90s of CCL and other Cephems were 64 micrograms/mL and 0.25-8 micrograms/mL. The MIC90s of CDTR and CFTM were < or = 1 microgram/mL of BLNAR (15 strains). However there of CFDN and CPDX were 8 micrograms/mL and CCL were > or = 16 micrograms/mL. Two strains which were produced beta-lactamase were highly--ABPC resistant. Although B. catarrhalis all strains were produced beta-lactamase and Cephems except for CCL showed better susceptibility than AMPC. The MIC90s of Cephems were 0.25-2 micrograms/mL against Peptostreptococcus spp.