CONTEXT: Ectoparasitoses (infestations with parasites that live on or in the skin) can cause considerable morbidity. Whereas pediculosis and scabies are ubiquitous, cutaneous larva migrans and tungiasis (sand-flea disease) occur mainly in hot climates. The prevalence of ectoparasitoses in the general population is usually low, but can be high in vulnerable groups. Scientific knowledge on how to deal best with parasitic skin diseases in different settings is scanty, and evidence-based measures for control are not available. For head lice and scabies the situation is daunting, because resistance of Pediculus humanus capitis and Sarcoptes scabiei to insecticides is spreading and unpredictable. STARTING POINT: J Hunter and S Barker reported different patterns of resistance in schoolchildren in Brisbane, Australia: full resistance to malathion, permethrin, and pyrethrum in two schools, whereas head lice were susceptible to malathion and, to a lesser extent, to pyrethrums in three other schools (Parasitol Res 2003; 90: 476-78). K Yoon and colleagues found different resistance patterns in the USA and Ecuador (Arch Dermatol 2003; 139: 994-1000). Head lice from Florida were less susceptible to permethrin than those from Texas, and parasites from Ecuador were susceptible to both insecticides tested. WHERE NEXT? The occurrence of resistant pediculosis and scabies is expected to increase numerically and geographically. Clinicoepidemiological studies are urgently needed to identify the factors which govern the emergence and spread of strains of P humanus capitis and S scabiei that are resistant to insecticide or acaricide. Oral treatment with ivermectin could substitute for topically applied compounds, particularly in resource-poor communities where polyparasitism is common. A better understanding of local epidemiology is required to develop control measures. This knowledge has to be applied in combination with environmental sanitation, health education, and culturally acceptable interventions that are affordable by the underprivileged.