PURPOSE: We assessed the use of alternating drugs with differing mechanisms of action as treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer. BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that the shape of a dose-response curve would be determined by the major mechanisms of resistance of a cancer to the drug being studied. Assessment of data from published clinical trials suggested that if our hypothesis were correct resistance of non-small cell lung cancer to most agents is due to "saturable passive" resistance mechanisms (non-competitive inhibition of drug effect due to deficiency of a factor required for drug effect) rather than to "active" resistance mechanisms (competitive inhibition of drug effect due to excess of a factor) or to "non-saturable passive resistance (due to factor alteration or mutation). Using drugs with differing mechanisms of action is a strategy that might be of value against passive resistance. METHOD: In patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer, we used four alternating cisplatin-based regimens. In each regimen, cisplatin 80 mg/m(2) was given iv on day 1 of each course. The regimens were: cisplatin + vinorelbine 25 mg/m(2) days 1, 8 and 15, cisplatin + gemcitabine 1000 mg/m(2) days 1, 8 and 15, cisplatin + paclitaxel 200 mg/m(2) day 1 iv over 1h, and cisplatin + etoposide 100 mg/m(2) po days 1-6. Patients were assigned randomly to different regimen sequences. Patients first received 1 course of each of these 4 regimens, then received 1 further course of each of single agent vinorelbine, gemcitabine, paclitaxel and etoposide (at the same doses as in courses 1-4), without cisplatin. (Cisplatin was omitted from courses 5-8 to limit cumulative toxicity.) Change in tumor size was measured after each course. RESULTS: Thirty-six patients were entered. One patient achieved complete remission and nine achieved partial remissions, for an objective response rate of 28% (95% confidence intervals, 13-43%). Nineteen patients (53%) (95% confidence intervals, 37-69%) had stable disease. Eleven patients had growth of >10% on one regimen followed by tumor shrinkage of >10% on a later one. Median survival was 8.1 months, 1-year survival was 28% and 2-year survival was 6%. No unexpected toxicity was seen. CONCLUSIONS: The use of four alternating regimens is feasible in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Response rates and survival times were comparable to those observed for standard chemotherapy approaches, suggesting that this strategy does not offer any major advantage. We plan to explore the hypothesis that this approach failed since tumor cells surviving first exposure to chemotherapy rapidly down-regulate their ability to undergo apoptosis.