A standardised protocol has been developed by World Health Organization (CDS/RBM/2002) to assess the efficacy of common antimalarials in the treatment of clinically manifested infection with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria for areas with low to moderate transmission. The therapeutic efficacy protocol is based on clinical and parasitological responses of the patients and it has the purpose of determining the practical efficacy of the drug regimen in study areas with the ultimate objective of ascertaining its continued usefulness or the necessity for replacing it in the routine treatment. Present study has been conducted at seven sites--Kathiatali and Simonabasti of District Nowgaon, Assam; Sonapur and Boko of District Kamrup, Assam; Keonjhar Town, Padampur and Basudebpur of District Keonjhar, Orissa. In order to reduce the patient recruitment time, health centre close to well-defined community was identified to conduct the activities at peak malaria season by selecting local pockets and organising mobile clinics. Microscopically confirmed cases of P. falciparum were enrolled according to the criteria for inclusion and exclusion. Treatment with recommended drug was given under supervision and a follow-up schedule at various intervals for 28 days was maintained. In chloroquine (CQ) study areas, wherever patients showed treatment failure, they were treated with second line drug--sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) combination and then followed-up as per study protocol. It was observed that 30% cases showed treatment failure to CQ in District Nowgaon, where revised drug policy has already been introduced. In Kamrup district, treatment failure with CQ was found to be less than 25%, which denotes the said regimen is still effective. Almost all the patients from Padampur and Basudebpur of District Keonjhar responded to CQ, treatment failure was noticed only in two patients (3%). The antifolate combination found to be fully effective as second line and also as first line wherever revised drug policy has been introduced.