AIM: The aim of the study was to investigate neutrophil respiratory burst activity (NRBA) in workers who were occupationally exposed to formaldehyde. METHODS: NRBA, spontaneous and stimulated with E. coli, N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP) and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), was studied by means of quantitative flow cytometric determination in 29 workers who were occupationally exposed to formaldehyde; 21 healthy subjects, not exposed to formaldehyde, served as controls. All subjects underwent clinical assessment, including a review of a summary of their medical history and a physical examination. Routine haematological tests were performed. RESULTS: A statistically significant predominance of subjective symptoms and objective clinical findings of chronic upper respiratory tract inflammation, as well as decreased resistance to infections, was observed in the 29 workers exposed to formaldehyde, compared with the controls (chi2 = 9.28, P = 0.02). No statistically significant difference in the spontaneous and stimulated NRBA between the exposed workers and the control group was observed. The spontaneous NRBA (percentage oxidizing cells) was significantly lower in the group of exposed workers with upper respiratory tract findings and frequent and long-lasting infectious inflammatory relapses (median and range 0.45 (0.02-2.03), mean values 0.65 +/- 0.74) than in the healthy controls (median and range 1.35 (0.07-8.69), mean values 2.42 +/- 2.47; P < 0.05), and in the group of exposed workers with rare and short, acute, inflammation of the upper respiratory tract or without any inflammations (median and range 1.00 (0.02-8.67), mean values 1.67 +/- 2.08; P < 0.05). A significant negative correlation between the duration of occupational exposure to formaldehyde and erythrocyte count and haematocrit was found. CONCLUSIONS: The observed decrease of spontaneous NRBA in workers with a history and clinical findings of frequent and long-lasting relapses of chronic inflammation of the upper respiratory tract could be due to formaldehyde exposure and individual susceptibility. The results obtained suggest that functional changes in polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes could serve as an early indicator of an impact of formaldehyde on NRBA. The applied method might be used for identifying groups at increased toxicological risk.