PURPOSE: To review current guidelines concerning the outpatient management of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), to discuss antibiotic resistance and its relation to outcomes, and to define the appropriate use of newer macrolides in CAP. DATA SOURCES: Comprehensive review of the scientific literature, comparison of published clinical practice guidelines, and expert opinion. CONCLUSIONS: Despite increasing knowledge regarding its etiology and pathogenesis, CAP remains the seventh leading cause of death in the United States. Although 80% of all patients with CAP are treated as outpatients, over 1 million hospital admissions due to CAP occur each year. From an employer perspective, total annual employer costs were fivefold greater for patients with pneumonia than for those who were not affected. Appropriate antimicrobial choices should lead to improved outcomes. Reports of increasing resistance of pathogens associated with CAP, increasing frequency of atypical pathogens, and the availability of an increasing number of antimicrobials have made treatment decisions more involved. IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: In an effort to improve outcomes, several guidelines have been published recommending appropriate antimicrobial agents to treat CAP in different patient populations. All guidelines base treatment recommendations on the hospitalization status of the patient, and all agree that coverage of atypical pathogens as part of an initial empirical regimen is important. Comorbidity and modifying factors that may increase the risk of infection with resistant organisms also are taken into account. Controversy exists regarding the use of newer macrolides versus newer fluoroquinolones as initial empirical therapy. The applicability of the reported increasing resistance of common pneumonia pathogens to outcomes in regimens containing newer macrolides is a subject of debate. Defining appropriate antimicrobial use in different patient groups should help achieve better outcomes and allay the development of resistance.