OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the microbiology, pharmacokinetic parameters, drug interactions, and results of the available clinical trials of gemifloxacin for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis (AECB). DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE (1966-September 2003) was searched for primary and review articles. Data from the manufacturer were also included. Key words included adverse effects, clinical trials, drug interactions, gemifloxacin, and pharmacokinetic parameters. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All articles and product labeling concerning gemifloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for treatment of CAP and AECB, were included for review. DATA SYNTHESIS: Compared with currently available fluoroquinolones, gemifloxacin demonstrated improved in vitro activity against Streptococcus pneumoniae (minimum inhibitory concentration for 90% eradication 0.03 microg/mL) and similar activity against gram-negative respiratory pathogens (Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis) and atypical pathogens such as Chlamydia pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Gemifloxacin, consistent with other available fluoroquinolones, has insufficient activity against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus to allow clinical use for such infections. Gemifloxacin has adequate bioavailability and a favorable drug interaction profile. Gemifloxacin was comparable to commonly employed nonfluoroquinolone regimens for treatment of CAP and AECB, although the studies were designed to demonstrate equivalence. Gemifloxacin once daily for 5-7 days was well tolerated in controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies. Available clinical data, however, are insufficient to draw clinical or toxicologic distinctions between gemifloxacin and other fluoroquinolones. CONCLUSIONS: Gemifloxacin may be a suitable choice for empiric treatment of CAP or AECB. However, due to the significant history of fluoroquinolone-induced hepatic failure and dermatologic complications, the use of this drug should be closely monitored.