OBJECTIVE: Helicobacter pylori (Hp) infection presents high prevalence in the world, but there are few pediatric assays evaluating antimicrobial treatment using a short regimen of triple therapy. To evaluate the eradication rate and long term therapeutic effect of a triple therapy consisted of omeperazole, clarithromycin (CLA) and amoxycillin (AMO) on Hp infection, the authors explored the alternative therapeutic programs and their effects after first therapeutic failure. METHODS: A total of 192 children with Hp infection were divided into two groups: 157 children were given the triple therapy for one week (CLA group); 35 children were given another triple therapy composed of omeperazole, metronidazole (MET) and AMO for two weeks (MET group). All of the children were followed up for 1 - 36 months after the therapies ended. Twenty-two children in whom Hp was eradicated with CLA triple therapy were followed up for 3 years. The children of the two groups who had therapeutic failure were given re-treatment as follows. CLA triple therapy was given for one week to the children who had failure after MET triple therapy; increased doses of CLA with longer treatment course was given to the children who had failure after CLA triple therapy. A tetra therapy consisted of omeperazole, colloidal bismuth subcitrate (CBS), furazolidone (FUR) and AMO was given to the children in whom the re-treatment failed. RESULTS: The Hp eradication and ulcer recovery rate of CLA group was 90.4% (142/157) and 96.9% (32/33), respectively; the Hp eradication rate of MET group was 77% (27/35). There was significant difference between eradication rates of the two groups (chi(2) = 4.69, P < 0.05). The recurrence rate of 22 Hp eradicated children treated with CLA triple therapy was 4.5% (1/22) during the 3-year follow-up. The eradication rate of the three re-treatment programs for 29 children was 75% (6/8), 77% (11/15) and 100% (6/6), respectively. CONCLUSION: (1) Omeperazole, CLA and AMO triple therapy for one week was the best to eradicate Hp infection with high eradication rate, few side effects, short period of treatment, good compliance and low recurrence rate. (2) Proper increase of CLA dose and longer therapeutic course may increase the eradication rate. Omeperazole, CBA, FUR and AMO tetra therapeutic program may be used as an alternative treatment in patients who develop resistance to CLA triple therapy.