The responses of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis to a sublethal dose of trisodium phosphate (TSP) and its equivalent alkaline pH made with NaOH were examined. Pretreatment of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis cells with 1.5% TSP or pH 10.0 solutions resulted in a significant increase in thermotolerance, resistance to 2.5% TSP, resistance to high pH, and sensitivity to acid and H(2)O(2). Protein inhibition studies with chloramphenicol revealed that thermotolerance, unlike resistance to high pH, was dependent on de novo protein synthesis. Two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) of total cellular proteins from untreated control cells resolved as many as 232 proteins, of which 22 and 15% were absent in TSP- or alkaline pH-pretreated cells, respectively. More than 50% of the proteins that were either up- or down-regulated by TSP pretreatment were also up- or down-regulated by alkaline pH pretreatment. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-PAGE analysis of detergent-insoluble outer membrane proteins revealed the up-regulation of at least four proteins. Mass spectrometric analysis showed the up-regulated proteins to include those involved in the transport of small hydrophilic molecules across the cytoplasmic membrane and those that act as chaperones and aid in the export of newly synthesized proteins by keeping them in open conformation. Other up-regulated proteins included common housekeeping proteins like those involved in amino acid biosynthesis, nucleotide metabolism, and aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis. In addition to the differential expression of proteins following TSP or alkaline pH treatment, changes in membrane fatty acid composition were also observed. Alkaline pH- or TSP-pretreated cells showed a higher saturated and cyclic to unsaturated fatty acid ratio than did the untreated control cells. These results suggest that the cytoplasmic membrane could play a significant role in the induction of thermotolerance and resistance to other stresses following TSP or alkaline pH treatment.