The control of helminthiases in ruminants raised in open pasture has been mainly undertaken by using prophylactic measures in the environment, but these are often inadequate due to incorrect application. With the appearance of anthelmintics, the strategy for controlling these parasitoses, passed to pharmacological treatments which became effective in reducing their impact. However, the frequent and incorrect utilisation of these molecules resulted in resistance to anthelmintics and the presence of chemical residues in animal products for human consumption. Anthelmintic resistance is widespread throughout the world, heterogeneous and probably underestimated. This has encouraged the introduction of homeopathic agents and products derived from plants whose effectiveness has not been scientifically assessed. It is well known that it is possible to detect differences in resistance to the most important parasites between breeds. In Europe, it has been reported that some ovine autochthonous breeds, Scottish Blackface and Lacaune, showed higher resistance. The implementation of breeding strategies aimed at obtaining animals with naturally low susceptibility to nematode infestations could therefore play an increasingly important role. Standard animal breeding techniques have been largely successful in improving the performance of domestic animals in the last century. Standard quantitative selection requires field data on: i) individual phenotype performance; ii) expected covariance among animals due to blood relationship between them. The whole process of predicting the breeding value of animals in order to select subsequently the genetically superior parents of the next generation is entirely based on sophisticated computations (BLUP-animal model). In sheep, the main objective is always selecting for milk yield and sometimes, in addition, milk composition. However, due to the evolution of the EU agricultural policy and consumer demand in terms of healthy and organic food, more attention is now being given to traits related to health (resistance to EST, mastitis or parasitic diseases). Some studies conducted in New Zealand and Australia showed that nematode resistance is genetically controlled with high heritabilities and quite low genetic correlations with production traits. In this sense, some studies showed that it is possible to decrease the number of parasites in the framework of a traditional breeding programme. However, in most situations, this trait is not extensively recorded due to the high cost of individual recording. Therefore, it would be useful to implement breeding strategies based on the knowledge of the genes involved in this trait expression. Traditionally, two approaches are available to locate a gene: i) genome scan; ii) candidate gene approach. The candidate gene approach attempts to link general resistance to some particular genes. To date, genetic resistance against parasites is considered to be linked with the MHC and IgE genes. Furthermore, several gene detection studies based on the genome scan approach for this trait are currently being carried out on both crossed experimental populations (fat x lean Blackface lines and Sarda x Lacaune) and pure breeds (Churra). The preliminary results seem promising as to the use of marker assisted or genotype assisted selection for this trait, which is difficult and expensive to measure on a population scale.