Dogs are the domestic reservoir for Leishmania infantum (syn.: L. chagasi), the parasite causing zoonotic visceral leishmaniasis (ZVL) in both the Old and New Worlds. In foci of canine leishmaniasis (CanL), symptomatic disease occurs in less than 50% of infected dogs, and is characterized by chronic evolution of viscero-cutaneous signs. Among strategies recommended to control ZVL, detection and drug treatment of infected dogs are usually employed in the endemic countries of southern Europe. However, the conventional antileishmanial drugs successfully used in human therapy, such as pentavalent antimonials, amphotericin B, pentamidine or miltefosine, have low efficacy in the treatment of CanL. In dogs, these drugs induce only temporary remission of clinical signs, do not prevent occurrence of relapses, and often cause severe side effects. Leishmaniotic dogs may be classified into 4 groups: 1) Asymptomatic resistant dogs ("contacted dogs"), 2) Asymptomatic dogs (preclinical), 3) Dogs with minimal signs of leishmaniasis (oligosymptomatic dogs? Chronic form of leishmaniasis?), 4) Dogs suffering from different forms of clinical leishmaniasis (symptomatic dogs). The dog's immunological status and the associated clinical signs may influence the efficacy of antileishmanial drugs. Subjects belonging to groups 2, 3 and 4 should be always treated, in order to reduce their parasite load. Parameters that must be considered before starting the antileishmanial treatment are hemogram, renal and hepatic functions, electrophoretic protein pattern, antileishmania antibody titres, and bone marrow and lymph node parasite load. The most common antileishmanial drugs currently used in Italy to treat CanL are pentavalent antimonials (meglumine antimoniate) and allopurinol, alone or in combination. Other used drugs are aminosidine (syn.: paromomycin), pentamidine, metronidazole and spyramicin. Each drug regimen has different duration, from a few weeks (aminosidine), to a few months (meglumine antimoniate) or several months (allopurinol). One of the most recent drug used in human VL is liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome--L-AMB), a powerful antileishmanial drug in both experimental murine models and in VL patients. In Italy, L-AMB is now considered the drug of choice for the treatment of human cases. However, in HIV co-infected patients high doses of L-AMB are ineffective in obtaining a radical cure. In dogs, L-AMB treatment rapidly leads to clinical recovery but is uneffective to eliminate the parasites. Drugs containing amphotericin B should not be used in veterinary practice in order to avoid selection of parasites resistant to the drug, as it already occurred for the pentavalent antimonials. Currently, there is not a standard protocol for CanL treatment in Italy, as there is an extreme variability of proposed dosages. Clinical studies on immunotherapeutics and new antileishmanial drugs, such as miltefosine and its derivates, are in progress.