Penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates (n = 76) from clinical samples of patients admitted to Hacettepe University Hospital between January 1997 and December 2001 were included in the study. MICs of penicillin G, erythromycin A, clindamycin, cefaclor, cefotaxime, vancomycin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, ciprofloxacin and rifampicin were determined by agar dilution. The isolates were serogrouped on the basis of the Neufeld Quellung reaction and were typed by BOX-PCR. Genetic polymorphism of the penicillin resistance genes pbp2b and pbp2x was investigated by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. Of the 76 isolates tested, 64 (84.2%) showed intermediate resistance to penicillin, while 12 (15.8%) were resistant to higher levels of penicillin (MIC > or = 2 mg/L). The resistance patterns of the isolates revealed six different resistance profiles. There were 22 different serotypes, with c. 55% of the isolates belonging to serotypes 23B, 19A, 19F, 14, 6 A and 9V. Five distinct patterns for pbp2b and 12 distinct patterns for pbp2x were obtained by RFLP analysis of penicillin-binding protein genes. The combination of these patterns allowed isolates to be classified into 22 fingerprint subgroups. BOX-PCR analysis showed that the isolates fell into 14 distinct BOX genotypes, with 33 subtypes. Serotype 9V isolates with pbp genotype 2-6 and BOX-PCR type 4, 4.1 or 4.2 were related to the pandemic clone Spain(9V)-3. No relatedness to other international clones was detected among the other study strains, but genetic relatedness was observed among some of the serotype 19A and 23B isolates. Overall, the results demonstrated that most of the penicillin-resistant pneumococcal isolates in Turkey, other than those belonging to serotypes 9V, 19A and 23B, were derived from several independent clones, possibly resulting from multiple importation of strains originating from outside the country. Differences in pbp patterns, serotypes and resistance profiles among isolates that showed similar BOX-PCR patterns supported the hypothesis that horizontal transfer of capsular genes, pbp genes and other genetic determinants between S. pneumoniae and viridans group streptococci may have occurred.