BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The microbiological spectrum in cancer patients with febrile neutropenia has changed over the past several decades in western countries. The growing incidence of antimicrobial resistance is an inevitable consequence of the widespread use of antibiotics in medical settings. The aim of this study was to clarify the trends and antimicrobial resistance among pathogens causing bloodstream infections in febrile neutropenic adults with hematological malignancies. METHODS: The characteristics of pathogens causing bloodstream infection isolated from patients with febrile neutropenia who were treated at National Taiwan University Hospital from 1996 to 2001 were reviewed. A total of 1174 pathogens were isolated from 3093 admissions to a hematological ward during this period. Among them, 738 isolates were recovered from patients with febrile neutropenia. RESULTS: The majority (93%) of these neutropenic febrile patients had underlying acute leukemia or lymphoma. Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 57% of isolated pathogens, followed by Gram-positive bacteria (32%), fungi (7%), and anaerobes (3%). In decreasing frequency, Escherichia coli (13%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (12%), Enterobacter cloacae (7%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (6%), and Acinetobacter baumannii (5%) were the predominant Gram-negative bacteria, while coagulase-negative staphylococci (13%), viridans group streptococci (4%), and Staphylococcus aureus (4%) were the major Gram-positive pathogens. Two-thirds (20/30) of S. aureus isolates were resistant to oxacillin. No vancomycin-resistant enterococci were isolated. Resistance to cefotaxime was found in 63% of E. cloacae, 13% of K. pneumoniae and 10% of E. coli. Overall, 33% of E. coli and 13% of K. pneumoniae were resistant to ciprofloxacin. CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that the microbiological spectrum of microorganisms causing bloodstream infections in neutropenic febrile patients with hematological malignancies at National Taiwan University Hospital is different from western countries in that Gram-negative bacteria remain the predominant pathogens. Antimicrobial resistance among these pathogens is high and E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates with resistance to third-generation cephalosporins and ciprofloxacin are increasing.