The present paper proposes a new therapy using Trypanosoma cruzi trans-sialidase to treat diseases with unclear pathogenesis that present in common chronic inflammation and fibrosis. This hypothesis is based on recent findings that co-infection with mycoplasma and chlamydia is present in many of these diseases and that this enzyme was capable to eliminate or decrease the co-infection from the host. We identified that mycoplasmas and chlamydias are present in atherosclerosis, aortic valve stenosis, dilated cardiomyopathy, chronic chagasic myocarditis and cancer. We hypothetized that mycoplasmal infection may induce immunodepression in the host, favoring proliferation of pre-existent chlamydial infection and that elimination of mycoplasma would lead to improvement of the immune system resistance and the control of chlamydial proliferation. Mycoplasma has a particular parasitic relationship with host cells, involving strong adherence of their membranes, making it extremely difficult to eradicate mycoplasmal infection from the host. A new therapeutic approach is suggested using one or more agents that prevent or inhibit the adherence of mycoplasma to host cell membranes by removing sialic acid residues and preventing oxidation of the cells. The use of a neuraminidase enzyme, particularly the T. cruzi trans-sialidase enzyme, associated with treatment using anti-oxidating agents is proposed. Preliminary experimental animal and laboratory tests showed good results. The proposal that trans-sialidase from T. cruzi is efficient in combating co-infection of mycoplasma and chlamydia is based, at least in part, on the observation that chagasic patients suffering from T. cruzi infection present less mycoplasma and chlamydia infection in their tissues. Also, a lower incidence of the diseases above described to be related to mycoplasma infection is observed in chagasic patients. It is also hypothesized that co-infection with mycoplasma and chlamydia may induce oxidation of the host cells. Anti-oxidants such as those present in plant extracts may also be used in the treatment. Other diseases such as chronic hepatitis, glomerulonephritis, Multiple Sclerosis, Alzheimer's Syndrome and idiopathic encephalitis are other examples of chronic diseases where mycoplasma and chlamydia might be present, as they have the characteristics of unknown etiology, persistent chronic inflammation and fibrosis.