In the patient with a chronic respiratory disease, both Pseudomonas aeruginosa and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) are frequently detected from expectoration. Vancomycin (VCM) and arbekacin (ABK) are both recommended for the chemotherapy of MRSA infection in Japan. Minocycline (MINO) is also selected for the treatment of MRSA infection. While rifampicin (RFP) and a trimetoprim-sulfamethoxazole combination (ST) are also recommended in Europe and USA but not recommended in Japan for the chemotherapy of MRSA infection. It is pointed out that coexistence bacteria affect chemotherapy as an indirect pathogen. Not only an antibacterial action but the immunological action or the metabolic effect against chronic P. aeruginosa infection such as DPB is known by the administration of 14-membered ring macrolides including erythromycin (EM). We considered the influence of P. aeruginosa isolated with MRSA on the activity against anti-MRSA agents by the disk diffusion method with bilayer flat agar in vitro. Moreover, we also examined the influence of EM against the activity of the anti-MRSA agents when P. aeruginosa was coexistence. One strain of MRSA as an indicator strain and 100 strains of P. aeruginosa as test strains, which were obtained from clinical materials, were used for the following experiment. P. aeruginosa was streaked on to the Mueller-Hinton agar culture medium (MHA), and they incubated at 35 degrees C for 24 hours. Then, the blood agar plate was piled up, MRSA was streaked on the blood agar surface, the susceptibility test disks (VCM, ABK, MINO, RFP, ST) were put on it, and incubated at 35 degrees C for a further 24 hours. The diameter of the zone of inhibition around the susceptibility disks against MRSA was measured and compared with P. aeruginosa free experiments. The anti-MRSA activity of MINO, ST and ABK was reduced by coexistence of P. aeruginosa. In RFP and VCM, the anti-MRSA activity was reinforced by coexistence of P. aeruginosa. Although the anti-MRSA activity of ST and ABK has improved by EM addition in the MHA plates, the anti-MRSA activity has not improved in MINO. These results are suggesting that in a MRSA infection, the chemotherapy by anti-MRSA agents were affected by coexistence of P. aeruginosa as an indirect pathogen. The macrolides such as EM may be useful as a modulator for chemotherapy by ST or ABK when MRSA and P. aeruginosa are isolated at the same time from the patient.