Recently increase of enterococcal infections has been observed. These bacteria, mainly Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium are members of the normal flora of gastrointestinal tract but also are typical opportunistic pathogens. Enterococci are characterized by natural resistance to numerous antibiotics (among them cephalosporins), and also by easy acquired resistance to antibiotics. Infections caused by multiresistant strains are difficult in treatment, chronic, recurrent and sometimes fatal are described. Enterococcal infections are caused often by E. faecalis, rarely by E. faecium. In the last years other species of enterococci have been isolated from different clinical materials (E. casseliflavus, E. avium, E. durans, E. gallinarum). The aim of this study was to analyze the antibiotics susceptibility of Enterococcus spp. isolated from urine of children with urinary tract infection (UTI), hospitalized in the Upper Silesian Health Center of Child and Mother or treated ambulatory. Susceptibility of the 130 strains of E. faecalis and 41 E. faecium to: penicillin, tetracycline, high level of aminoglycoside (gentamycin 120 microg and streptomycin 300 microg), glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin), ciprofloxacin and nitrofurantoin was estimated. All isolated strains of E. faecalis (100%) were sensitive to glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin) and to nitrofurantoin, 96% strains were sensitive to penicillin, 43% to ciprofloxacin and 28% to tetracycline. All strains of E. faecium were sensitive to glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin), 32% strains were sensitive to penicillin, 19% to tetracycline 14% to ciprofloxacin and 50% to nitrofurantoin. Twenty two strains of E. faecalis (17%) and twelve strains of E. faecium (29%) were demonstrated high level resistance to aminoglycosides (HLAR). Among HLAR strains of enterococci, were observed strains of high level resistance only to streptomycin, high level resistance only to gentamycin and high level resistance to both aminoglycosides. The HLAR strains of E. faecalis and E. faecium were also resistant to other antibiotics: penicillin, tetracycline and ciprofloxacin. The most frequent cause of child urinary tract infection was E. faecalis, with high sensitivity to penicillins, glycopeptides and nitrofurantoin. The increased role of E. faecium and other strains of enterococci also has been shown. These species demonstrated sensitivity to glycopeptides, but resistance to other antibiotics, routinely used for treatment of UTI as well as to nitrofurantoin.