AIMS: Isolation and characterization of indigenous Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains from 12 grape varieties grown in an experimental vineyard of Apulia. METHODS AND RESULTS: Thirty to 40 colonies from each of the 12 fermentations were obtained at the end stage of spontaneous fermentation. By using morphological and physiological methods and by the PCR analysis of internal transcribed ITS1-5,8S-ITS2, the isolates belonging to Saccharomyces genus were identified. These isolates were further characterized by amplification with S. cerevisiae species- and delta element-specific primers, thus allowing the identification of S. cerevisiae strains selected from each of the 12 fermentations. By means of RFLP analysis of mtDNA, each S. cerevisiae population isolated from a single fermentation appeared to constitute a genetically homogenous group. The comparison of the 12 cultivar-specific mtDNA RFLP patterns, allowed classifying the 12 S. cerevisiae populations into three genetically homogenous groups. The isolated strains fermented vigorously in synthetic and grape juice medium and showed high alcohol and sulphur dioxide (SO(2)) resistance and low hydrogen sulphite (H(2)S) production. CONCLUSIONS: The molecular analysis, in conjunction with the traditional morphological and physiological methods, was useful in discriminating at strain level the indigenous population of S. cerevisiae present in a vineyard of Apulia. The dominant S. cerevisiae strains identified in the 12 fermented musts showed potentially important oenological characteristics. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The characterization of natural S. cerevisiae strains from several typical Italian grapes grown in a restricted experimental vineyard is an important step towards the preservation and exploitation of yeast biodiversity of Apulia, a relevant wine-producing region. The close relationship between the S. cerevisiae strains from different grapes grown in the same vineyard indicated that the occurrence of native strains is representative of the area rather than of the variety of grapes.