The last years witnessed significant change in therapeutic and infectious pathology of man, its immunoreactivity changed, especially in elderly patients. Thus, older people show the increase of chronic infectious-inflammatory diseases, characterized by flaccid, constantly recurring course, torpid to adequate etiotopic therapy. They are caused by conventionally-pathogenic or opportunistic microbes, often with atypical biological properties, having multiple resistance to antibiotics. About 30 new pathogenic microorganisms were revealed for the last 20-30 years, including HIV-infection agent. The number of patients with allergic and autoimmune diseases increased, thus resulting in high urgency of this problem in gerontology. Decrease of immunologic reactivity, observed practically in all parts of the world, but mostly manifested in Russia, is one of the causes of infectious pathology, including pathology of inner organs, manifestation of allergic and autoimmune diseases. General practitioners, gerontologists understand that to cope with the increased rate of infectious, allergic or autoimmune diseases only by antibiotics or anti-inflammatory medicines is next to impossible. It's clear now that the use of only chemotherapeutic drugs in treatment of elderly and therapeutic patients is a mistake. Immunocorrective medicines, which stimulate reparative processes, allow to accelerate the processes of involution and shorten the general period of treatment. Antibiotic inhibits the agent multiplication, but its complete elimination from the body is a result of immune factors activity. In elderly patients with inner organ pathology and chronic pathology on the background of the suppressed immunoreactivity the effect of antibiotics, as well as antifungal, antiviral and other chemotherapeutic medicines is ineffective or of low effect. Optimal clinical effect in elderly patients can obviously be achieved only if there is synergism in the activity of the body protective forces and antimicrobial drugs. Thus, immunoreactivity dysfunction has a significant part in the pathogenesis of inner organ diseases in elderly patients with the disturbance of immunological status. So in complex of medical means, indicated for this pathology, adequate immunotherapy plays a special role, and the main problem is the choice of particular drugs.