Parasite-free pastures would improve cattle health and performance, resulting in possible economic return to producers. Our objective was to determine the effect of a single series of anthelmintic treatment of steers prior to stocking on Coastal bermudagrass pastures, during five consecutive summers, on the parasite burden in cattle. The site for this experiment had been conventionally cropped for several decades, with no exposure to cattle, and would be expected to be relatively free of nematode larvae. The experimental design was a randomized complete block (landscape features) with a split plot arrangement of treatments where main plots were pasture fertilization treatments (mineral, clover plus mineral, and broiler litter) and split plots were low and high forage mass. Anthelmintic treatment included pour-on ivermectin on day -21, albendazole on day -7, and injectable ivermectin 48 h prior to stocking of pastures, with the cattle remaining in drylot during the 48-h period prior to being placed on the experimental paddocks. All steers received only one series of treatments during any given year. Yearling Angus steers (Bos taurus) were managed in a put-and-take grazing system with three "tester" steers assigned to each paddock and "grazer" steers added or removed at 28-day intervals. From 1994 to 1998, steers grazed the paddocks for a 140-day period from mid May until early October each year. Fecal samples for worm egg counts were obtained on day 0 and at 28-day intervals, thereafter. On all sampling days after day 0, samples were obtained only from tester animals. Over the 5-year period, the mean eggs per gram of feces (epg) gradually increased from 0 (following treatment) to a mean of 2.2 (range from 0.7 to 3.0) by the end of the grazing season (the last sampling date) in October. Although the epg were not zero, they were below threshold levels that would allow development of a parasite burden in cattle. In traditional management systems, cattle graze parasite-contaminated pastures; therefore, parasites negatively impact growth and productivity throughout the entire grazing period. Periodic anthelmintic treatments simply give a temporary reprieve from those parasitic infections. Conceptually, using the current grazing system, it should be possible to maintain these pastures in a parasite-free status indefinitely; however, from a drug resistance perspective, it would be most applicable in sod-based rotation systems where cattle graze from two to five years before land is returned to row-crops. By removing the effect of parasites, cattle can grow without the physiological constraints that gastrointestinal parasites place on appetite, digestion, nutrient utilization, and general well being.