The national antimicrobial resistance monitoring determines the current quantitative resistance level of life-stock pathogens, in order to permit the evaluation and surveillance of the distribution of resistances on a valid basis. During the examination period from June 2002 to July 2003, a total of 1849 pathogens was collected, following a representative German-wide pattern in collaboration with 29 laboratories. The selection of examined bacterial strains included different specimen causing respiratory diseases in fattening pigs (Pasteurella multocida, Bordetella bronchiseptica) and cattle (Pasteurella multocida, Mannheimia haemolytica), respectively, as well as strains causing mastitis in dairy cows (Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., E. coli). Determination of the in-vitro susceptibility (minimal inhibitory concentration) to at least 17 antimicrobial agents was performed centrally by the BVL using the microdilution broth method. The findings approximately match results of an analogous study conducted in 2001, and correspondingly revealed significantly lower resistance-values in comparison to data published for Germany so far. No correlation could be established between the incidence of resistance and differing stock densities. By means of the resistance monitoring data gathered by the BVL, the risk potential of antimicrobials applied in Germany can be reliably defined. This valuable information about the epidemiological situation of resistance in Germany can be helpful to veterinarians as a decision guidance when choosing appropriate means of therapy. Accordingly, the results stated by the BVL are apt to provide an important contribution to improving the safety of food-animal products. The experiences obtained from the monitoring also show that valid data about the antimicrobial susceptibility can only be raised on an interdisciplinary approach (federal agencies, county diagnostic laboratories, universities, industry). Currently, the BVL put into practice a study with an extended spectrum of bacterial species and indications.