In a relatively short period of time enormous strides have been made in the field of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HIV. Timing, mechanisms and risk factors for transmission have been elucidated and a large number of drug regimens have been shown to effectively reduce the risk of HIV infection in the child. A number of observations can be gleaned from the work that has been done to design and implement HIV perinatal prevention programs. First, pregnancy is a critical time to identify women with HIV infection and to link them and their families to ongoing HIV care and treatment In addition to providing perinatal prevention intervention, pregnancy serves as an entry point into the health-care system. There is a unique opportunity to link prevention and treatment efforts, two programmatic areas often viewed as conflicting and competing. Second, the evolution of perinatal prevention in high-resource settings and, to an increasing extent, more resource-constrained areas, reflects the interplay of science and public-health policy. Results of clinical trials and epidemiologic studies have progressively provided recommendations and guidelines for HIV counseling, testing and treatment for perinatal prevention. In many ways, the successes of perinatal prevention in the USA attest to the success of the dynamic interaction between health, science, and public policy. There is great hope and expectation that the next decade will be equally successful as care and treatment becomes increasingly available in resource-constrained settings. Third, a key element of perinatal prevention is the provision of safe and effective family planning to women of childbearing years. Many women, particularly in low-resource settings, have multiple pregnancies, influenced by cultural imperatives and limited access to safe, affordable contraception. Enhancing these services will enable women to make informed decisions about their health, their families, and their futures. Finally, it is critical to remember that primary prevention of HIV infection in women holds the true key to perinatal prevention. While work must continue to identify more efficacious and safe regimens to prevent MTCT, preventing women from becoming HIV-infected should remain the true measure of success.