Salmonella serovars are important reservoirs of antimicrobial resistance. Recently, we reported on multidrug-resistant (MDR) Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strains among pigs with resistance to ampicillin, kanamycin, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole, and tetracycline (resistance [R] type AKSSuT) and resistance to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ampicillin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole, and tetracycline (R type AxACSSuT). In the present study, 67 isolates (39 from humans and 28 from pigs) of clinically important Salmonella serovar Muenchen were characterized. Among the porcine isolates, 75% showed resistance to seven antimicrobials: ampicillin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, and kanamycin (R type ACSSuTAxK). One isolate from humans showed resistance to 10 of the 12 antimicrobials: ampicillin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, kanamycin, gentamicin, cephalothin, and ceftriaxone (R type ACSSuTAxKGCfCro). Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis revealed no clonality between the porcine and the human strains. The porcine and the human MDR strains carried class 1 integrons of 2.0 and 1.0 kb, respectively. Genes specific to the porcine strain included aadA2, aphA1-Iab, and tetA(B). DNA sequencing revealed that the porcine isolates carried bla(OXA-30) on a class 1 integron. Genes specific to the human strain included bla(TEM), strA, strB, cmlA, tetA(A), and aadA2. No bla(CMY-2) gene was detected. Serovar Muenchen strains of porcine and human origin were able to transfer resistance genes to laboratory strain Escherichia coli MG1655 by conjugation. Plasmid restriction with four restriction enzymes, EcoRI, BamHI, HindIII, and PstI, showed that the conjugative plasmids from porcine Salmonella serovar Muenchen and Typhimurium R-type MDR strains isolated from the same farms at the same time were similar on the basis of the sizes and the numbers of bands and Southern hybridization. The plasmid profiles among the Salmonella serovar Muenchen isolates from the two host species were different. This is the first report to show a high frequency of MDR Salmonella serovar Muenchen strains from pigs and a human strain that is similar to the MDR isolates with the AmpC enzyme previously reported among Salmonella serovars Newport and Typhimurium strains. The MDR strains from the two host species independently represent public health concerns, as Salmonella serovar Muenchen is among the top 10 causes of salmonellosis in humans.