OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical efficacy of tolterodine prescribed to children with non-neurogenic daytime urinary incontinence secondary to overactive bladder who had previously failed to improve with oral oxybutynin treatment and its relation to the side-effect profile and compliance status. METHODS: We evaluated 92 children presenting with daytime wetting, with or without nocturnal enuresis, who were receiving oral oxybutynin treatment. Children with chronic urinary tract infections, a neurologic lesion, an anatomic abnormality of lower urinary tract, voiding abnormality, and less than 1 year of oxybutynin treatment were excluded. Of the remaining 41 children (mean age 7.2 years, range 5 to 14 years), 30 agreed to switch to tolterodine and 11 continued receiving oxybutynin. Anticholinergic side effects, compliance, and clinical efficacy were assessed in the follow-up. RESULTS: Of the 30 patients who switched to tolterodine, a complete response was in 18 patients (60%), partial improvement in 11 (37%), and no improvement in 1 (3%) after a mean of 14.4 months (range 12 to 16 months) of oxybutynin treatment. The anticholinergic side-effect score was 7.2, 9.3, and 11, respectively, for those with a complete response, partial improvement, and no improvement in the compliant group. The noncompliant group had the greatest side-effect score (16.9). The fairly compliant group had a side-effect score of 12.3. After a mean of 7.1 months (range 6 to 9 months) of tolterodine use, a complete response was reported in 24 patients and partial improvement in 5 (17%). In 1 patient, treatment failed completely. However, his side-effect score decreased from 11 to 2. All tolterodine users were compliant with treatment. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study in children with non-neurogenic daytime urinary incontinence have shown that tolterodine may increase the efficacy of pharmacotherapy, particularly in patients noncompliant to oxybutynin. Additional investigation of the anticholinergic side-effect scores and compliance tables is required to improve the clinical results of pharmacotherapy in incontinence due to overactive bladder in children.