Understanding the mechanisms by which beta-lactamases destroy beta-lactam antibiotics is potentially vital in developing effective therapies to overcome bacterial antibiotic resistance. Class A beta-lactamases are the most important and common type of these enzymes. A key process in the reaction mechanism of class A beta-lactamases is the acylation of the active site serine by the antibiotic. We have modeled the complete mechanism of acylation with benzylpenicillin, using a combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) method (B3LYP/6-31G+(d)//AM1-CHARMM22). All active site residues directly involved in the reaction, and the substrate, were treated at the QM level, with reaction energies calculated at the hybrid density functional (B3LYP/6-31+Gd) level. Structures and interactions with the protein were modeled by the AM1-CHARMM22 QM/MM approach. Alternative reaction coordinates and mechanisms have been tested by calculating a number of potential energy surfaces for each step of the acylation mechanism. The results support a mechanism in which Glu166 acts as the general base. Glu166 deprotonates an intervening conserved water molecule, which in turn activates Ser70 for nucleophilic attack on the antibiotic. This formation of the tetrahedral intermediate is calculated to have the highest barrier of the chemical steps in acylation. Subsequently, the acylenzyme is formed with Ser130 as the proton donor to the antibiotic thiazolidine ring, and Lys73 as a proton shuttle residue. The presented mechanism is both structurally and energetically consistent with experimental data. The QM/MM energy barrier (B3LYP/ 6-31G+(d)//AM1-CHARMM22) for the enzymatic reaction of 9 kcal mol(-1) is consistent with the experimental activation energy of about 12 kcal mol(-1). The effects of essential catalytic residues have been investigated by decomposition analysis. The results demonstrate the importance of the "oxyanion hole" in stabilizing the transition state and the tetrahedral intermediate. In addition, Asn132 and a number of charged residues in the active site have been identified as being central to the stabilizing effect of the enzyme. These results will be potentially useful in the development of stable beta-lactam antibiotics and for the design of new inhibitors.