BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Dermatophytes responsible for causing dermatophytoses in humans have acquired resistance to certain antimycotic drugs. We isolated naturally occurring actinomycetes with an ability to produce metabolites having antimycotic property. The timecourse of antifungal metabolite production in terms of arbitrary units (AU) under optimum conditions was studied. METHODS: Water and soil samples were collected from various locations. The actinomycetes were isolated on starch casein medium and screened for their antifungal activity against yeasts and molds including dermatophytes. One promising isolate which showed a unique, stable and interesting property of inhibiting only dermatophytes was selected and characterized. Optimization of antifungal metabolite production in terms of AU using Trichphyton rubrum as target was done. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum fungicidal concentration (MFC) values of the culture supernatant from the isolate and that of griseofulvin were determined for all dermatophytes. RESULTS: Of the 218 actinomycete isolates, 14 per cent produced the metabolites having antifungal activity. The selected actinomycete, identified as Streptomyces rochei AK 39 produced metabolite, which was active against only dermatophytes whereas yeasts and other molds were resistant to it. Starch casein medium was found to be good for inducing antifungal activity in the isolate. The maximum antifungal metabolite production (400 AU/ml) was achieved in the late log phase, which remained constant during the stationery phase, and it was extracellular in nature. The MIC and MFC values of the culture supernatant from the isolate against the dermatophytes were within the range 1.25 to 5 and 1.25 to 10 AU/ml respectively. INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: The metabolite from Streptomyces rochei AK 39 was produced during late log phase and was active against only dermatophytes with a greater potency than griseofulvin. However, this needs further investigation using purified powdered form of the active component.