Oxazolidinones have become reliable clinical and candidate antimicrobial agents to be utilized for infections caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-positive cocci, especially vancomycin-resistant enterococci and methicillin-resistant staphylococci. However, mutational resistance of the ribosomal target has been described for several species. Longitudinal surveillance remains necessary to monitor for this evolving linezolid resistance pattern. A survey of linezolid and several comparison Gram-positive focused agents was initiated in 2002 (7971 strains, >99.0% compliance) for 54 participating sites in the United States, Canada, Europe (6 nations), Latin America (2 nations), and the Asia Pacific (2 nations). The 5 and 25 sites in Canada and the United States, respectively, submitted 200 strains each to a central laboratory for organism identification/confirmation and reference MIC processing. The 10 remaining nations had 200 strain samples from 1 to 4 separate institutions. Linezolid resistance (MIC >/= 8 microg/mL) was confirmed by alternative susceptibility testing methods (Etest, AB BIO Disk, Solna, Sweden; disk diffusion method) and target mutation characterization by PCR and sequence analysis. Linezolid activity against the 6 major organism groups did not vary between geographic areas. A total of 98.1% of linezolid MIC values were between 0.5 and 2 microg/mL, and only 0.5% of results were at 4 microg/mL, which included 32 Staphylococcus aureus (0.9%) and 5 (0.5%) enterococcal isolates. Linezolid resistance was detected in only 4 isolates (0.05%): 1 each Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Enterococcus faecium, and a viridans group Streptococcus. All 4 isolates had a G2576U mutation in the 23S rRNA target. Linezolid activity as outlined by these Zyvox Annual Appraisal of Potency and Spectrum (ZAAPS) Program results demonstrate sustained, near complete activity against contemporary Gram-positive isolates on 4 monitored continents and in centers utilizing oxazolidinones. Rare linezolid-resistant strains were identified in the United States only (0.05% resistance overall).