BACKGROUND: Integrons are strongly associated with multidrug resistance in Enterobacteriaceae. Little is known about the natural history of integron-associated resistance in hospitals during nonoutbreak periods. The prevalence of integrons and the incidence of cross-transmission and horizontal gene transfer in Enterobacteriaceae with reduced susceptibility to cephalosporins (ERSC) were determined for 2 intensive care units (ICUs). METHODS: Microbiological surveillance using rectal swab samples obtained 2 times per week and genotyping using amplified fragment-length polymorphism (AFLP) were used to determine colonization with and genetic relatedness of ERSC. IntI1 integrase polymerase chain reaction (PCR), conserved-segment PCR, restriction fragment-length polymorphism, and DNA sequencing were used to determine the prevalence and contents of integrons. RESULTS: Of 457 patients, 121 patients were colonized with ERSC, and 174 isolates underwent AFLP and PCR. In 34 isolates obtained from 31 patients, 11 different integrons were identified; these integrons encoded resistance to streptomycin/spectinomycin, gentamicin/tobramycin/kanamycin, chloramphenicol, and trimethoprim. Integrons could be divided into 7 clusters of > or =2 isolates each. Compared with isolates that were negative for integrons, isolates that were positive for integrons were associated with resistance to piperacillin, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, and quinolones. Acquisition rates of integron-carrying ERSC were 10 cases per 1000 patient-days in the first ICU and 8 cases per 1000 patient-days in the second ICU, with most cases (26 of 34) being acquired during the ICU stay. Nineteen episodes resulted from cross-transmission. In addition, 2 cases of interspecies transfer and 1 case of intraspecies transfer of integrons were recorded. Younger age was independently associated with acquisition of integron-carrying ERSC (hazard ratio, 0.953; 95% confidence interval, 0.926-0.987). CONCLUSION: Surveillance, genotyping, and integron analysis identified previously unnoticed outbreaks of integron-carrying ERSC. Cross-transmission appeared to be the dominant route of transmission. Therefore, barrier precautions are necessary to prevent further spread.