Contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP), caused by Mycoplasma mycoides subsp. mycoides SC (MmmSC), is one of the most significant cattle disease in Africa. The control measures, which led to eradication from numerous countries are not feasible in Africa where the only prophylaxis relies on vaccination. However, the attenuated vaccines, used up to now in Africa, are of low efficiency. The development of an improved vaccine is, therefore, a necessity. The purpose of this study was to compare some immunological parameters in MmmSC-infected cattle (endobronchial versus natural in-contact infection) and assess the response in correlation with the clinical outcome (death versus recovery). Characterization of the immune parameters elicited in recovered animals, known to be refractory to new infection, will be an important step towards development of new vaccines against CBPP. A significant outcome of this study was the demonstration that all MmmSC-infected cattle developed a MmmSC-specific cell-mediated immune response. A kinetic analysis of the MmmSC responsiveness showed that the main difference between endobronchially- and in-contact infected animals was the delay before the onset of the MmmSC-specific immune response. The first MmmSC-responding PBMC sample was selected from each animal for cell phenotyping. The phenotypic analysis of this early MmmSC-induced response revealed the predominant contribution of the CD4 T-cells in all animals whereas IFNgamma was only constantly produced in recovered animals. Evolution of this early MmmSC-specific immune response was then followed by a kinetic analysis of the MmmSC-induced CD4 T-cell response and IFNgamma released. The results demonstrated that in recovered animals, the MmmSC-specific CD4 Th1-like T-cell response was maintained until slaughtering whereas in animals with acute disease, progression of CBPP was associated with a decreased ability of the PBMC to produce IFNgamma. The results led to the identification of immune parameters, which correlate with protection against CBPP and to a relevant strategy for the development of improved vaccines against this disease.