Tendency of isolated bacteria from infections in general surgery during the period from April 2003 to March 2004 were investigated in a multicenter study in Japan, and the following results were obtained. In this series, 455 strains including 14 strains of Candida spp. were isolated from 191(75.2%) of 254 patients with surgical infections. Two hundred and thirty-nine strains were isolated from primary infections, and 216 strains were isolated from postoperative infections. From primary infections, anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria and aerobic Gram-negative bacteria were predominant, while aerobic Gram-positive bacteria were predominant from postoperative infections. The isolation rate of aerobic Gram-positive bacteria, such as Enterococcus spp. and Staphylococcus aureus were higher from both types of infections. Among anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Peptostreptococcus spp. was the highest from both types of infections. Among aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Escherichia coli was the most predominantly isolated from primary infections, followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in this order, and from postoperative infections, E. coli was the most predominantly isolated, followed by P. aeruginosa, E. cloacae, and K. pneumoniae. Among anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, the isolation rate of Bacteroides fragilis group was the highest from both types of infections. The isolation rate of anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria from primary infections and that of aerobic Gram-positive bacteria from postoperative infections were high in the last several years. In this series, we noticed no vancomycin-resistant Gram-positive cocci, but a few strains of moderately arbekacin-resistant MRSA. Carbapenm-resistant P. aeruginosa was seen in less than 10 per cents. Last year we noticed that there were cefazolin-resistant E. coli producing extended spectrum beta-lactamase, but there was no highly cefazolin-resistant E. coli in this year. In the next series, increase of both anaerobic bacteria and Enterococcus spp. should be carefully followed up.