OBJECTIVE: To report our experience in identification and treatment of acute otitis media (AOM) with otorrhea secondary to community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA), which is seen in children at increasing rates. DESIGN: Clinical and laboratory records were retrospectively reviewed between January 2003 and December 2003. SETTING: Primary pediatric clinic. PATIENTS: Six pediatric patients who had AOM with otorrhea caused by CA-MRSA. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical resolution of AOM with otorrhea. RESULTS: All patients had acute-onset otorrhea associated with their AOM. Five patients had tympanostomy tubes and 1 had perforation of the tympanic membrane. None of the patients were responding to treatment with oral antibiotics (amoxicillin sodium-clavulanate potassium, cefpodoxime proxetil, and cefprozil) or fluoroquinolone ear drops (ofloxacin, ciprofloxacin). Specimens were obtained from the ears for cultures, and MRSA was present in the cultures. The organisms were resistant to levofloxacin and erythromycin in all patients and resistant to clindamycin hydrochloride in 2 patients. The cultures were sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, gentamicin sulfate, rifampin, and vancomycin hydrochloride. All patients were treated successfully with oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and ear drops (gentamicin sulfate or polymyxin B sulfate-neomycin sulfate-hydrocortisone [Cortisporin]). CONCLUSIONS: The rising rate of CA-MRSA as a cause for many pediatric infections is a major concern. It is very important to obtain cultures from patients with nonresponsive or persistent otorrhea with AOM to look for MRSA and determine the sensitivity of the pathogen to antibacterial therapy. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is a good choice for initial, empirical therapy when combined with a topical agent for AOM with otorrhea if CA-MRSA is suspected. Further studies are needed to determine whether there is a link between the overuse of topical fluoroquinolones in pediatric patients and the recent rising rate of CA-MRSA.