We present here a comprehensive review of the current literature plus our own findings about in vivo and in vitro analysis of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, viral pathogenesis, mechanisms of interferon action, interferon resistance, and development of new therapeutics. Chronic HCV infection is a major risk factor for the development of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Standard therapy for chronic HCV infection is the combination of interferon alpha and ribavirin. A significant number of chronic HCV patients who cannot get rid of the virus infection by interferon therapy experience long-term inflammation of the liver and scarring of liver tissue. Patients who develop cirrhosis usually have increased risk of developing liver cancer. The molecular details of why some patients do not respond to standard interferon therapy are not known. Availability of HCV cell culture model has increased our understanding on the antiviral action of interferon alpha and mechanisms of interferon resistance. Interferons alpha, beta, and gamma each inhibit replication of HCV, and the antiviral action of interferon is targeted to the highly conserved 5'UTR used by the virus to translate protein by internal ribosome entry site mechanism. Studies from different laboratories including ours suggest that HCV replication in selected clones of cells can escape interferon action. Both viral and host factors appear to be involved in the mechanisms of interferon resistance against HCV. Since interferon therapy is not effective in all chronic hepatitis C patients, alternative therapeutic strategies are needed to treat chronic hepatitis C patients not responding to interferon therapy. We also reviewed the recent development of new alternative therapeutic strategies for chronic hepatitis C, which may be available in clinical use within the next decade. There is hope that these new agents along with interferon will prevent the occurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma due to chronic persistent hepatitis C virus infection. This review is not inclusive of all important scientific publications due to space limitation.