Decoquinate is a quinolone coccidiostat introduced during 1967 as an in-feed prophylactic for broiler chickens. Despite early drug-resistance problems and its age, the drug is still used commercially worldwide. Decoquinate here serves as a valuable model in a field study that addresses the dynamics and economic impact of the development of coccidial resistance to potent synthetic anticoccidial drugs. The results of this unique, hitherto unpublished, study on the initial emergence of resistance of avian coccidia (Eimeria spp.) to a new drug in the field may be of strategic value in the continued use of decoquinate or the introduction of new drugs. The commercial performance of the first 3-5 crops of broilers to be medicated with decoquinate on each of six farms was monitored during 14 months in 1968-1969, supplemented by assessments of the species, population dynamics and decoquinate-resistance of coccidia isolated from each farm. During the rearing of each flock in a single shed on each farm, oocysts were counted in fresh faecal samples collected on three occasions, and the species were identified by their morphology if possible, supported if necessary by the biological characteristics of infections in chickens. E. acervulina was the most common species, followed by E. mitis, E. maxima, E. tenella and E. praecox. E. brunetti occurred rarely, and E. necatrix was not found. Decoquinate-resistance was evident in several species during the rearing of the first decoquinate-medicated crop on each farm, although clinical coccidiosis did not occur. It was concluded that inherently resistant mutants of E. acervulina, E. brunetti, E. maxima, E. tenella, and probably also E. mitis and E. praecox, were selected from field populations by 6 weeks during their first exposure to decoquinate. During up to four more subsequent crops, cycling of resistant parasites stimulated host immunity, which had no obvious adverse impact on commercial performance. There was no apparent seasonal effect. A hypothesis is proposed to explain the sudden and rapid emergence of quinolone-resistance in the coccidia, and why bird health was not thereby compromised in these circumstances.