The purpose of this study was to determine if injections of different dosages of tuftsin would enhance the immune response and disease resistance against the infections due to the opportunistic pathogens Aeromonas hydrophila and Edwardsiella tarda in Labeo rohita fingerlings. Hence, four different dosages of tuftsin in PBS suspension at the rate of 0, 5, 10, 15 mg kg(-1) body weight of fish were injected intraperitoneally to the fingerlings of L. rohita at 2-week intervals for four times. After every 2-week interval, different serum biochemical, haematological and immunological parameters of fish were evaluated. Biochemical and haematological parameters including serum total protein content, albumin content, globulin content, albulin:globulin ratio, glucose content, leucocyte counts etc.; cellular immune parameters including superoxide anion production, phagocytic activities, lymphokine production index etc.; humoral immune parameters including lysozyme activity, complement activity, serum bactericidal activity etc., in the fish were evaluated after every 2-week interval. After 56 days, fish were divided into two subgroups under each major treatment group for challenge with two pathogens A. hydrophila and E. tarda. The mortality (%) and agglutinating antibody titre was recorded on 28th day post challenge. Most of the immune parameters including leucocyte count, phagocytic ratio, phagocytic index, lysozyme activity, complement activity, and serum bactericidal activity were significantly (p<or=0.05) maximum on 42 days after three i.p. injections of 10 mg kg(-1) body weight of tuftsin. Challenge study indicated least mortality in the group of fish injected with 10 mg kg(-1) body weight of tuftsin for four times. Multiple injections of tuftsin might have maintained the activation of phagocytic cells for a long period, which in turn led to long-term protection in the fish. Thus, multiple injections of 10 mg kg(-1) body weight of tuftsin for three times can be advocated for enhancing the immune response of fish species under aquaculture.