Studies were conducted to determine the immunomodulatory effects of high dietary ascorbic acid (vitamin C) on growth, serum concentration, non-specific immune response and disease resistance of a commercially important Asian catfish, Clarias batrachus. Four practical diets were formulated to contain 0, 500, 1000 and 2000 mg ascorbic acid (AA) equivalent/kg diet, supplied as L-ascorbyl-2-polyphosphate (LAPP) and were fed for 2, 4, 6 and 8 weeks. Each diet was fed to triplicate groups of catfish with initial body weight of 15.47+/- 0.59 g. After 2, 4, 6 and 8 weeks, growth, serum concentration of AA, oxidative respiratory burst, lysozyme and natural hemolytic complement activities, myeloperoxidase (MPO) content and natural haemagglutination titre were measured. Ten numbers of fish in duplicate were challenged with Aeromonas hydrophila to measure the level of protection against aeromoniasis at each one of the assayed times. The results showed that AA concentration in serum correlated positively with those in the diets and reached its saturation level after the time period directly proportional to the increase in dose level. Fish fed AA-supplemented diets showed significantly (p < 0.05) higher specific growth rate after 2 weeks of feeding. The superoxide production was enhanced after 8 weeks of feeding fish at a supplemented dose level of 2000 mg/kg. Similarly, MPO content, haemagglutination titre and alternative complement activity in serum enhanced with the increase of dietary AA levels at different duration of feeding. The lysozyme activity was not affected by the dietary AA treatment. On the other hand, feeding of AA at all concentrations significantly increased percent survival against A. hydrophila challenge after 4 weeks compared to control. The non-specific immune parameters as well as percent survival were enhanced as a result of high AA supply particularly at 500 mg/kg diet, although the increase was not maintained but returned to the initial levels after 4 weeks. These results support the possible use of AA as an immunostimulant at a dose of 500 mg/kg diet for a period of 4 weeks in catfish farming.