The objective of this study was to examine the epidemiology of ciprofloxacin-resistant, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae strains. Sixty-nine unique patient isolates of K. pneumoniae isolated from a variety of clinical specimens submitted to the clinical bacteriology laboratories of The Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh and associated General Practices were identified and susceptibility testing was performed with the Vitek system. Strains flagged as ESBL-positive by the Vitek system were subjected to isoelectric focusing. The results suggested that all 69 isolates harboured at least one ESBL, which was later confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with bla(TEM) and/or bla(SHV) primers. The purified PCR product was subjected to automated sequencing and the results were compared with the BLAST online search engine. Of the 69 isolates, 32 (46.4%) were found to be resistant to ciprofloxacin, 11 (15.9%) were intermediate and 26 (37.7%) were sensitive. To investigate the epidemiological relationship between the ciprofloxacin-resistant ESBL-positive strains, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was performed. Rapidest software was used to calculate the genetic distance by the Nei distance method. PFGE analysis indicated that the clinical isolates belonged to four distinct genotype clusters (Groups A, B, C and D); each group or cluster was homogeneous or compact with respect to certain characteristics. Group A consisted of 25 isolates, group B of 3 isolates and Groups C and D of 2 isolates each. These results indicate that the spread of resistance is largely as a result of the dissemination of a single clonal strain. PCR was used to amplify the gyrA and parC genes from genomic DNA of the ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates. The amplified product was sent for analysis by automated DNA sequencing and the resulting DNA sequences were compared with the gyrA gene of K. pneumoniae. The sequencing results demonstrated that alteration of the GyrA subunit of DNA gyrase at amino acid 83 and/or amino acid 87 plays a central role in conferring high-level quinolone resistance in K. pneumoniae possessing ESBLs.