Triple antibiotic ointment (TAO) containing neomycin, polymyxin B, and bacitracin was launched in the 1950s in the United States (USA) as a prescription product and then was used over the counter (OTC) since the 1970s (USA) to prevent superficial wound infections. In Australia, TAO has been restricted to prescription use. This study 1) determined cross-resistance patterns of neomycin compared with other aminoglycosides; 2) determined the level and trend of resistance to TAO and individual components especially versus mupirocin-resistant strains (USA); and 3) established the baseline TAO activity level against pathogens from Australia. A total of 200 strains (> or =50% gentamicin-resistant) from the United States were used for the cross-resistance study including Staphylococcus aureus (110), coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS; 50), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (10), Escherichia coli (20), and other Enterobacteriaceae (10) tested against TAO, bacitracin, polymyxin B, neomycin, amikacin, gentamicin, streptomycin, tobramycin, and mupirocin. Fifty gentamicin-resistant isolates from each year (1997-2002) were used to determine the activity of TAO over time. Baseline resistance rates of TAO among 300 Australian isolates (AGARS Program, 2002-2003) were also studied. Reference broth microdilution methods were used in all phases of this study. At a 1:100 dilution of the ointment concentration, TAO inhibited all CoNS, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacteriaceae isolates, and resistance to TAO among Staphylococcus aureus at this concentration was only 5% in the cross-resistance study. Patterns of susceptibility in the United States did not significantly vary from 1997 to 2002. Australian pathogens showed that TAO was 98% active against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and 100% for Enterobacteriaceae, methicillin-susceptible S. aureus, CoNS, and P. aeruginosa, the rates equivalent to those observed in the United States. Mupirocin-resistant S. aureus (5%) and CoNS (47%) were all TAO-susceptible. All Gram-negative species were also mupirocin-resistant, but inhibited by neomycin and/or polymyxin B components of TAO. In conclusion, aminoglycoside resistance patterns differ significantly, and none of the commonly tested agents could accurately predict neomycin resistance. TAO resistance was rare in the United States after extensive OTC use and was not adversely influenced by decades of parenteral aminoglycoside use. Australian surveillance showed high levels of TAO susceptibility in sampled isolates as a baseline for possible OTC availability. TAO maintains a wider spectrum of activity compared with mupirocin and was usable against mupirocin-resistant Gram-positive strains.