AIM: To evaluate the biodiversity of lactobacilli from slightly fermented sausages (chorizo, fuet and salchichon) by molecular typing, while considering their safety aspects. METHODS AND RESULTS: Species-specific PCR, plasmid profiling and randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD)-PCR were used to characterize 250 lactic acid bacteria (LAB) isolated from 21 low acid Spanish fermented sausages. Lactobacillus sakei was the predominant species (74%) followed by Lactobacillus curvatus (21.2%) and Leuconostoc mesenteroides (4.8%). By plasmid profiling and RAPD-PCR 144 different strains could be differentiated, 112 belonging to Lact. sakei, 23 to Lact. curvatus and 9 to Leuc. mesenteroides. Ion-pair high performance liquid chromatography was used to detect biogenic amine production. Tyramine and phenylethylamine were produced by 14.4 and 12.4% of the isolates, respectively, all belonging to the species Lact. curvatus. The production of tyramine was stronger than that of phenylethylamine. Partial sequencing of the tyrosine decarboxylase gene from Lact. curvatus was achieved. A specific PCR assay to detect the Lact. curvatus tyramine-producers was designed. The disc diffusion test was used to detect antibiotic resistance among the isolates. Most isolates displayed resistance to vancomycin and gentamicin. Only four strains were resistant to most of the antibiotics tested. None of the isolates were resistant to erythromycin. CONCLUSIONS: Lactobacillus sakei would be the species of choice for further use as starter culture in fermented sausage production. Strain typing and characterization of biogenic amine production together with antibiotic susceptibility testing for the selection of starter cultures could help to increase the quality and safety of the products. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Species-specific PCR, RAPD and plasmid profiling proved to be efficient at typing LAB at species and strain level. Information on biogenic amine production and transferable antibiotic resistance is important in order to avoid selection of strains with undesirable properties as starter cultures.