The antigonococcal potency of gemifloxacin and 5 reference comparator antimicrobials was determined for a selected collection of gonococcal isolates. The 250 Neisseria gonorrhoeae strains were inclusive of (1) 50 historic strains from Japan with elevated fluoroquinolone minimal inhibitory concentration values (QRNG) and (2) 200 contemporary strains from clinical specimens in 2004 (176 from 6 sentinel sites in the United States and 24 bacteremic isolates from the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program). The rank order of potency of the tested antimicrobials for the entire collection was: ceftriaxone (MIC(90) = 0.06 microg/mL) > gemifloxacin (1 microg/mL) > tetracycline (2 microg/mL) > ciprofloxacin = levofloxacin = penicillin (4 microg/mL). The activity of gemifloxacin was not affected by penicillinase production; however, its activity was decreased for penicillin-resistant strains. Cross-resistance between gemifloxacin and the older fluoroquinolones was present, and the gemifloxacin MIC90 value was higher for the ciprofloxacin-resistant strains compared with the ciprofloxacin-susceptible strains (2 versus 0.016 mug/mL, respectively). More than 20.0% of the recent clinical strains were resistant to penicillin, tetracycline, and ciprofloxacin with >30.0% of gonococci resistant to ciprofloxacin in Washington State and Hawaii. The historic QRNG strains from the Far East were predominantly of intermediate susceptibility (88.0%) to ciprofloxacin, with a gemifloxacin MIC90 value of only 0.25 microg/mL. The bacteremic gonococcal strains were exquisitely susceptible to the 3 quinolones tested (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, and gemifloxacin, MIC90 at < or = 0.03 microg/mL) and ceftriaxone (MIC90 = 0.06 microg/mL). In summary, the potency of gemifloxacin was competitive and positioned between that of ceftriaxone and older quinolones or penicillin or tetracycline, irrespective of the gonococcal resistance phenotype. Gemifloxacin should be considered for further development as a therapeutic option to treat uncomplicated infections due to emerging strains resistant to penicillins, tetracycline, and some older fluoroquinolones.