The antibacterial activity of meropenem (MEPM) and other parenteral antibiotics against clinical isolates of 907 strains of Gram-positive bacteria, 1790 strains of Gram-negative bacteria, and 192 strains of anaerobic bacteria obtained from 30 medical institutions during 2004 was measured. The results were as follows; 1. MIC90 of MEPM for almost all of enterobacteriaceae and Haemophilus influenzae were 4-fold to 32-fold lower than those of other carbapenems. MEPM was more active than other carbapenem antibiotics against Gram-negative bacteria, especially against enterobacteriaceae and H. influenzae. MEPM were active against most of the species tested in Gram-positive and anaerobic bacteria, except for multi-drug resistant strains including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. 2. As for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, imipenem (IPM) showed high cross-resistant rate againt meropenem-resistant P. aeruginosa (87.9%). MEPM showed low cross-resistant rate both againt IPM-resistant P. aeruginosa (49.2%) and ciprofloxacin-resistant P. aeruginosa (38.0%). 3. The proportion of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) strains was 3.1% (4 strains) in Escherichia coli, 8.0% (2 strains) in Citrobacter koseri, 2.5% (3 strains) in Klebsiella pneumoniae, 2.5% (2 strains) in Enterobacter cloacae, 0.9% (1 strains) in Serratia marcescens, and 2.2% (2 strains) in Proteus mirabilis. The proportion of metallo-beta-lactamase strains was 1.6% (5 strains) in P. aeruginosa. 4. Of all species tested, Peptostreptococcus spp. was the only species, which MIC90 of MEPM was more than 4-fold higher than that in our previous study using clinical isolates during 2002 (0.25 microg/ml --> 1 microg/ml). Therefore, there is almost no siginificant decrease in susceptibility of clinical isolates to meropenem. In conclusion, the results from this surveillance study suggest that MEPM retains its potent and broad antibacterial activity and therefore is a clinically useful carbapenem at present, 9 years after available for commercial use.