The bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp. and Pseudomonas aeruginosa) isolated from 565 patients diagnosed as urinary tract infections (UTIs) in 14 institutions in Japan were collected between August 2003 and July 2004. The susceptibilities of these bacteria to various antimicrobial agents were examined. The bacteria were divided into 2 groups consisting of uncomplicated UTIs and complicated UTIs (with and without indwelling catheter) based on their isolation origins. The results were compared with those obtained between 1994 and 2002. The drug sensitivity of S. aureus in this year was similar to those in up to the previous years and S. aureus showed the best susceptibility to vancomycin. The drug sensitivity of E. faecalis in this year also was similar to those in up to the previous years. The drug sensitivity of E. coli in this year was generally good except penicillins and was similar to those in up to the previous years. Among cephems, cefozopran (CZOP) and cefpirome (CPR) showed the highest potency activity (MIC90: < or = 0.125 microg/mL). An antibacterial activity of cefotiam (CTM) was stable for 10 years and was fine (MIC0: < or = 0.5 microg/mL). The sensitivity of E. coli to carbapenems and carumonam (CRMN) also was good like to CZOP. The sensitivity of the complicated UTIs group to quinolones, however, has decreased after 2000 and it was suggested that the resistance to the drug has developed. Kiebsiella spp. showed a decrease in the susceptibility to some of cephems. The drugs indicating a big decrease in the sensitivity were cefazolin, CTM, cefaclor, and cefpodoxime. Imipenem, carbapenems, also indicated a decrease in the sensitivity. The susceptibility of the strain to the other drugs was similar to that in up to the previous years. Among them, CZOP maintained good susceptibility (MIC90: > or = 0.125 microg/mL against uncomplicated UTIs, 0.25 microg/mL against complicated UTIs) like meropenem. The drug sensitivity of P. aeruginosa was generally low and was not much different from that in up to the previous years.