The bacterial strains isolated from 565 patients diagnosed as having urinary tract infections (UTIs) in 14 institutions in Japan were collected between August 2003 and July 2004. The susceptibilities of them to many kinds of antimicrobial agents were investigated. Of them, 701 strains were estimated as prophlogistic bacteria and used for the investigation. The strains consisted of 258 Gram-positive bacterial strains (36.8%) and 443 Gram-negative bacterial strains (63.2%). Against Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin (VCM) showed the strongest activity and prevented the growth of all strains with 2 microg/mL. Against Streptococcus agalactiae, ampicillin (ABPC), cefozopran (CZOP), imipenem (IPM), and clarithromycin (CAM) showed a strong activity and the MIC90 was 0.125 microg/mL or less. Against Enterococcus faecalis, VCM, ABPC, and IPM showed a strong antibacterial activity. The antibacterial activity of cephems to Escherichia coli was generally good, and especially CZOP and cefpirome (CPR) showed the strongest activity (MIC90: < or = 0.125 microg/mL). Quinolone resistant E. coli [MIC of ciprofloxacin (CPFX): > or =4 microg/mL] was detected at frequency of 15.7%, which was higher than that in the last year. Against Klebsiella pneumoniae, meropenem (MEPM) showed the strongest activity and next, the antibacterial activity of CRMN and CZOP was good. The antibacterial activity of the other cephems, however, significantly decreased, compared with that evaluated in last year. Against Serratia marcescens, MEPM had the strongest antibacterial activity. Against Proteus mirabilis, MEPM and CRMN showed the strongest activity and prevented the growth of all strains with 0.125 microg/mL or less. Nest, cefmenoxime (CMX), ceftazidime (CAZ), cefixime (CFIX), cefpodoxime (CPDX), CPR, CZOP, and cefditoren (CDTR) showed a strong activity. The antibacterial activity of the drugs to Pseudomonas aeruginosa was generally low, and MIC90 of all the drugs was ranged from 32 to < or = 256 microg/mL except IPM and amikacin (AMK) having 16 microg/mL. The antibacterial activity of CZOP was relatively good (MIC50: 2 microg/mL).