Current data concerning epidemiology, clinical picture, pathogenesis, prevention and treatment of Avian influenza H5N1, data of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of antiviral drugs--neuraminidase inhibitors and M2 channels inhibitors, also the recommendation of WHO for prevention prevalence of infection were discussed in the review. Strategic measures of WHO aims to protect humans from contact with infected poultry, in case of contact, to prevent transmission of this infection from human to human and occurrence of pandemic. Infected birds were the major source of the H5N1 influenza virus among humans in Asia. Mainly humans became infected by eating infected birds, by poor hygiene procedures when cooking infected birds, or by close contact with infected poultry. At present transmission of the H5N1 influenza from human to human by aerosol way hasn't been registered, but ongoing monitoring for identification mutation and adaptation of H5N1 influenza virus to human is needed. Season influenza and avian H5N1 influenza differ by the ways of transmission, clinical picture, severity, pathogenesis, response to treatment. Diagnostic of infection is difficult due to non-specific initial symptoms, in most cases disease begins with disturbance of under respiratory ways and in rare cases--from upper respiratory ways. High viral titre is identified in pharynx but not in nose. Initial symptoms of the H5N1 influenza are: fever greater then 38 degrees Celsius, mild cold, cough and shortness of breath, practically all patient have viral pneumonia, later secondary bacterial infection occurs, mild to severe respiratory distress, diarrhea, vomiting and abdominal pain. Conjunctivitis is rarely diagnosed contrary to season influenza. Sometimes gastrointestinal disorder begins a week early then respiratory symptoms. Complication also includes renal and multi organ failure. The cytokine storm is commonly developed during H5N1 influenza. For treatment and for prevention (under certain conditions) of the H5N1 influenza neuraminidase inhibitors such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza) are recommended. Currently circulatory of the H5N1 strains are fully resistant to an older class of antiviral drugs--the M2 channels inhibitors (amantadine and rimantadine). The knowledge of epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical picture, treatment of the H5N1 influenza in humans, in spite of progress isn't complete. Future coordination of scientific investigation of the H5N1 influenza in humans should be provided not only in the countries where infection was revealed, but all around the world.