Immune status during fracture of lower jaw is a very important factor of pathogenesis. Immune depression is developing shortly after the trauma and it turns out to be a bad prognostic sign, during which the risk of developing the bone wound complications and traumatic osteomyelitis increase, and in case of absence of such complications we are faced with significant extension of a term of healing of bone wounds. We have carried out immune studies in 20 patients with lower jaw fractures. To study SlgA and lysozyme activity we took saliva and studied percentage of T- and B-lymphocytes (and their sub-populations) in blood by the use of micro method. Immunoglobulins were defined by the method of radial immuno diffusion; we determined the interferon system by in vitro stimulation of leucocytes; neutrophilic phagocyte activity was studied by the method of Kost U.A. and Stepko M.I. According to the obtained results, during fractures of lower jaw sharp decrease of interferon system and significant decrease of phagocyte activity was observed. Likewise was decreased lysozyme and SlgA indices, which refer to the depression of immune status of mouth cavity. From the cell immunity indices the decrease of T-activators and T-helpers and reduction of immunoregulation index should be emphasized. Quantity of B-lymphocytes was decreased by 10%. With the practical point of view the obtained results refer, alongside with carrying out the surgical, orthopedic and anti-microbial treatments, to the urgency of application of activators of phagocytosis, interferon and lysozyme immunomodulators. With the view of correction of cell immunity it is necessary to correct factors of T-lymphocytes and to increase activity of SigA and lysozyme, as the factors determining local resistance. The results obtained by us are rather important with the view of both immunology and applied, practical medicine. It enables us to lead the substantiated immune therapy, which will be harmonized with other etiotropic anti microbial therapy and will help us to improve significantly the results of anti-inflammation therapy and to decrease cases of purulent complications.