Increased oxidative stress under hyperglycemia may contribute to progressive deterioration of peripheral insulin sensitivity. In this study, we investigated whether gliclazide, a second-generation sulfonylurea, can protect 3T3L1 adipocytes from insulin resistance induced by oxidative stress, and whether gliclazide can restore insulin-stimulated glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) translocation under oxidative stress. We incubated 3T3L1 adipocytes in hydrogen peroxide to produce oxidative stress, then administered various concentrations of gliclazide, N-acetylcystein (NAC), or glibenclamide. Cells treated with these drugs were next exposed to insulin, subsequent glucose uptake was measured, and the insulin-stimulated GLUT4 translocation was monitored in living cells. We found that hydrogen peroxide treatment alone suppressed glucose uptake by insulin stimulation to 65.9%+/-7.8% of the corresponding controls (P<.01). However, addition of 0.1 to 10 micromol/L gliclazide to hydrogen peroxide-treated cells dose-dependently restored glucose uptake, with 5 micromol/L gliclazide significantly restoring glucose uptake to 93.3+/-6.6% (P<.01) even under hydrogen peroxide. Treatment with the known anti-oxidant NAC also dose-dependently (0.1-10 mmol/L) restored insulin-induced glucose uptake in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. However, glibenclamide (0.1-10 micromol/L), another second-generation sulfonylurea, failed to improve glucose uptake. Similarly, treatment with 5 micromol/L gliclazide or 10 mmol/L NAC significantly overcome the reduction in insulin-stimulated GLUT4 translocation by hydrogen peroxide (P<.01), whereas 5 micromol/L glibenclamide did not. Therefore our data regarding gliclazide further characterize its mechanism of hypoglycemic effect: the observed improvements in insulin sensitivity and in GLUT4 translocation indicate that gliclazide counters the hydrogen peroxide-induced insulin resistance in 3T3L1 adipocytes and also would further augment the hypoglycemic effect of this drug as insulinotropic sulfonylurea.