A variety of evolutionarily related defensin molecules is found in plants and animals. Plant gamma-thionins and scorpion neurotoxins, for instance, may be categorized in this functional group, although each class recognizes a distinct receptor binding site. Such molecules are also categorized into the superfamily of cysteine-rich proteins. Plant defensins were generally believed to be involved in antimicrobial or antifungal mechanisms and, unlike scorpion toxins, little is known about whether these molecules are also endowed with the function of insect resistance. We have previously reported the isolation of a cDNA encoding a small cysteine-rich protein designated VrD1 (VrCRP) from a bruchid-resistant mungbean, which is apparently the first discovered plant defensin exhibiting in vitro and in vivo both insecticidal and antifungal activities. Our previous data also successfully demonstrated that VrD1 is toxic to E. coli and able to completely arrest the growth of Sf-21 insect cells at low concentration. However, the molecular and structural basis of this unique insecticidal activity of VrD1 is not clear. Therefore, in the present study, we use structural approach and phylogenic analysis to investigate the evolutionary and functional relations for such unique insecticidal activity. From our results, it is suggested that VrD1, in addition to gamma-thionins and several amylase inhibitors, is highly homologous to scorpion toxins, especially the short toxins. Moreover, based on the observation from our homology structures, VrD1 may utilize a newly found cluster of basic residues to achieve its insecticidal function, whereas all the other plant gamma-thionins were known to use a previously identified basic cluster conserved for gamma-thionins. Considering the general feature of short scorpion toxins to act on insect cell membranes with K(+)- or Cl(-)-channels as molecular targets, our analysis of interaction and recognition modes provides reasonable correlations between this newly found basic cluster and the insecticidal activity of VrD1, which is also comprehended as a possible link for "homoplasy evolution" between plant and animal defensin molecules.