OBJECTIVE: To assess the impact of antiretroviral therapy optimized by genotypic antiretroviral resistance testing (GRT) on healthcare costs over a 2-year period in patients after antiretroviral treatment failure. STUDY DESIGN: Non-randomized, prospective, tertiary care, clinic-based study. PATIENTS: One-hundred and forty-two HIV patients enrolled in the 'ZIEL' study and the Swiss HIV Cohort Study who experienced virological treatment failure. METHODS: For all patients GRT was used to optimize the antiretroviral treatment regimen. All healthcare costs during 2 years following GRT were assessed using microcosting. Costs were separated into ART medication costs and healthcare costs other than ART medication (that is, non-ART medication costs, in-patient costs and ambulatory [out-patient] costs). These cost estimates were then split into four consecutive 6-month periods (period 1-4) and the accumulated cost for each period was calculated. Univariate and multivariate regression modelling techniques for repeated measurements were applied to assess the changes of healthcare costs over time and factors associated with healthcare costs following GRT. RESULTS: Overall healthcare costs after GRT decreased over time and were significantly higher in period 1 (32%; 95% confidence interval [Cl]: 18-47) compared with period 4. ART medication costs significantly increased by 1,017 (95% Cl: 22-2,014) Swiss francs (CHF) from period 1-4, whereas healthcare costs other than ART medication costs decreased substantially by a factor of 3.1 (95% Cl: 2.6-3.7) from period 1 to period 4. Factors mostly influencing healthcare costs following GRT were AIDS status, costs being 15% (95% Cl: 6-24) higher in patients with AIDS compared with patients without AIDS, and baseline viral load, costs being 12% (95% Cl: 6-17) higher in patients with each log increase in plasma RNA. CONCLUSIONS: Optimized antiretroviral treatment regimens following GRT lead to a reduction of healthcare costs in patients with treatment failure over 2 years. Patients in a worse health state (that is, a positive AIDS status and high baseline viral load) will experience higher overall costs.