BACKGROUND: Telavancin, a new multifunctional lipoglycopeptide antibiotic, exhibits broad-spectrum Gram-positive activity against a variety of pathogens. We examined the effects of human serum and antimicrobial concentrations on the activity of telavancin against glycopeptide-intermediate staphylococcal species (GISS), heteroresistant GISS (hGISS) and three vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (VRSA) compared with vancomycin, quinupristin/dalfopristin, linezolid and daptomycin. METHODS: MIC and MBCs were performed against all antimicrobials. Time-kill experiments were performed using two strains of GISS (Mu50; NJ992) and VRSA (VRSAMI; VRSAPA) at 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and 32x MIC. Telavancin and daptomycin were evaluated in the presence and absence of serum. RESULTS: All GISS and hGISS were susceptible to the tested agents with telavancin and quinupristin/dalfopristin demonstrating the lowest MIC, followed by daptomycin, linezolid and vancomycin. Against VRSA, daptomycin and quinupristin/dalfopristin had the lowest MIC, followed by linezolid, telavancin and vancomycin. In the presence of serum, telavancin and daptomycin MICs increased 1- to 4-fold. Concentration-dependent activity was demonstrated by telavancin and daptomycin, in the presence and absence of serum. Telavancin and daptomycin were bactericidal against GISS and performed similarly in the presence of serum. Quinupristin/dalfopristin demonstrated bactericidal activity at clinically achievable concentrations, whereas linezolid was bacteriostatic. CONCLUSIONS: Telavancin demonstrated concentration-dependent bactericidal activity against GISS, hGISS and VRSA at concentrations equal to or above 4x MIC, which corresponds to therapeutic levels against GISS and clinically achieved concentrations against the VRSA. Similar to daptomycin, telavancin activity was diminished in the presence of serum but bactericidal activity was maintained. Further investigation with telavancin against GISS, hGISS and VRSA is warranted.