Tendency of isolated bacteria from infections in general surgery during the period from April 2004 to March 2005 were investigated in a multicenter study in Japan, and the following results were obtained. In this series, 645 strains including 17 strains of Candida spp. were isolated from 226 (79.0%) of 286 patients with surgical infections. Three hundred and seventeen strains were isolated from primary infections, and 345 strains were isolated from postoperative infections. From primary infections, anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria and anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria were predominant, while aerobic Gram-positive bacteria were predominant from postoperative infections. The isolation rate of aerobic Gram-positive bacteria, such as Enterococcus spp. and Staphylococcus aureus were higher from both types of infections. Among anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Peptostreptococcus spp. was the highest from both types of infections. Among aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Escherichia coli was the most predominantly isolated from primary infections, followed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Citrobacter freundii in this order, and from postoperative infections, P. aeruginosa was the most predominantly isolated, followed by E. coli, E. cloacae, and K. pneumoniae. Among anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, the isolation rate of Bacteroides fragilis group was the highest from both primary infections followed by Bilophila wadsworthia. While the isolation rate of B. fragilis group was also the highest from postoperative infections, the following bacteria were Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and B. wadsworthia in this order. In this series, we noticed no vancomycin-resistant Gram-positive cocci, but a few strains of moderately arbekacin-resistant MRSA. Carbapenem-resistant P. aeruginosa but not multidrug-resistant was seen in 13.3 per cents. Also cefazolin-resistant E. coli probably producing extended spectrum beta-lactamase was seen in 7.0 per cents. We should be carefully followed up the facts that an increasing isolation rates of B. fragilis group and B. wadsworthia which were resistant to both penicillins and cephems.