This study assessed the antimicrobial resistance of nasopharyngeal pneumococci isolated from children aged < 5 years in day-care centres and orphanages throughout Russia during 2001-2002. Swabs were collected from 2484 children in 43 day-care centres and eight orphanages in 11 cities of European Russia, and from 1669 children in 37 day-care centres and three orphanages in eight cities of Asian Russia, with a total of 1144 and 912 Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates being recovered in European and Asian Russia, respectively. All macrolide-non-susceptible (MICs 0.5-128 mg/L) and fluoroquinolone-non-susceptible (ciprofloxacin MICs > or = 4 mg/L) isolates were tested for resistance mechanisms and clonal relatedness. Non-susceptibility rates, by CLSI criteria, were 19.3%, 0.9% and 0.4% for penicillin G, cefotaxime and amoxycillin-clavulanate, respectively. Resistance to macrolides and lincosamides was also relatively low, i.e., < 7% for clindamycin and 14- and 15-membered macrolides. The highest rates of non-susceptibility were for tetracycline and co-trimoxazole (52.0% and 64.5%, respectively). No clones resistant to ciprofloxacin (MICs > or = 8 mg/L) were found, but 1.7% of isolates were non-susceptible (MIC 4 mg/L). No resistance was found to levofloxacin, gemifloxacin, telithromycin or vancomycin. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analysis showed no relationship between ciprofloxacin- and macrolide-non-susceptible isolates in European and Asian Russia. Resistance among macrolide-resistant isolates resulted mostly from the presence of erm(B) and mef(A), and from changes in L4; additionally, L22 mutations were common in isolates from Asian Russia. Non-susceptibility to quinolones was associated with mutations in parC and parE among European isolates. Asian Russian isolates had mutations in parC and gyrA, and alterations in parE were more common. There were substantial differences in non-susceptibility and mechanisms of resistance between pneumococci from Asian and European Russia, with orphanages appearing to be 'hot-spots' of resistance.