At present little or no data is available regarding the resistance profiles of anaerobic bacteria in relation to the general usage of antibiotics. The objective of this study was to assess whether any potential relationship exists between the dynamics of antibiotic resistance of anaerobic bacteria and the consumption of antibiotics during the last 3 years within the Estonian population. In total, 416 anaerobic isolates were investigated from various clinical samples. The anaerobes were isolated on Wilkins-Chalgren Agar, incubated in an anaerobic glove box and identified by standard methods. beta-lactamase negative strains were tested against metronidazole, clindamycin, benzylpenicillin and the positive strains were further tested against metronidazole, clindamycin, and ampicillin/sulbactam by E-tests. The results of the susceptibility tests were interpreted according to the current criteria of NCCLS. Data from the Estonian State Agency of Medicines was used to assess the antibiotic consumption rate in the population (Defined Daily Doses per 1000 inhabitants annually). The following species of anaerobes were isolated: B. fragilis group, Bacteroides sp., Fusobacterium sp., Porphyromonas sp., Prevotella sp., Peptostreptococcus sp., in addition to various unidentified Gram-positive rods. Metronidazole resistance was not found among Gram-negative bacteria despite a relatively high consumption of this antimicrobial agent in Estonia. Only ampicillin/sulbactam demonstrated excellent in vitro activity against all anaerobes. Unexpectedly despite a relatively low rate of consumption of clindamycin a high rate of resistance to this agent occurred; a similar situation was noted for penicillin. In the present study we did not observe a relationship between the changes in antibiotic consumption (DDD/1000) rate and the resistance pattern of anaerobic bacteria to metronidazole, clindamycin, penicillin and ampicillin/sulbactam during a 3-year follow-up period. High resistance to penicillin among some species and also to clindamycin is similar to the global trend and argues for limited use of these antibiotics in empirical treatment. We would suggest that monitoring of local susceptibility pattern is necessary for the selection of initial empirical therapy.