Our objective was to evaluate the impact of the reinforcement of a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) control programme and to assess the impact of risk adjustment on the interpretation of data. A stepwise, retrospective analysis of 3-year prospectively collected data was performed in a 600-bed French teaching hospital in the Parisian area. A reinforcement of a pre-existing programme for limiting the spread of MRSA was implemented in 2002 and 2003 by increasing the frequency of the feedback of surveillance data, by using alcohol-based disinfectants, and by increasing patient screening. Different indicators were used to follow the change over time of MRSA transmission: the proportion of MRSA acquired in our hospital, the incidence of newly acquired MRSA/1,000 patient-days (PD) (incidence of newly acquired MRSA), the incidence of newly acquired MRSA isolated in at least one clinical specimen/1,000 PD (incidence of newly acquired clinical MRSA), and a risk-adjusted indicator, the incidence of newly acquired-MRSA isolated in at least one clinical specimen/1,000 PD of carriers identified at admission (incidence related to the risk of acquisition). The change over time of these indicators was studied with the chi-square test for trend. During the study, all indicators decreased significantly, with a mean drop of 0.07/1,000 PD for the incidence of newly acquired clinical MRSA, and a mean drop of 3.0/1,000 PD for the incidence related to the risk of acquisition. The proportion of MRSA acquired in our hospital decreased from 49.3% in 2002 to 24.1% in 2004. Concurrently, between 2002 and 2004, the number of patients screened on admission to hospital or at the time of intra-hospital transfer increased by 31% and the consumption of waterless alcohol-based hand disinfectants increased by 244%. The decreasing trend of all indicators emphasizes the effectiveness of the reinforcement of our MRSA control programme. From 2002 to 2004, the trend of the indicator related to the risk of acquisition over time is similar to those of other indicators. Further studies should be useful to assess if risk-adjustment is absolutely necessary when tracking rates within a single institution.