The bacterial strains isolated from 490 patients diagnosed as having urinary tract infections (UTIs) in 14 institutions in Japan were collected between August 2004 and July 2005. The susceptibilities of them to many kinds of antimicrobial agents were measured. Of them, 577 strains were estimated as causative bacteria and used for the measurement. The strains consisted of 156 gram-positive bacterial strains (27.0%) and 421 gram-negative bacterial strains (73.0%). Against Staphylococcus aureus, arbekacin (ABK), vancomycin (VCM) showed the strongest activity and prevented the growth of all strains with 2 microg/mL. Against Enterococcus faecalis, ampicillin (ABPC) and VCM showed a strong antibacterial activity. The antibacterial activity of cephems to Escherichia coli was generally good, and especially cefozopran (CZOP) and cefpirome (CPR) showed the strongest activity (MIC90: < or = 125 microg/mL). Quinolone resistant E. coli [MIC of ciprofloxacin (CPFX): > or = 4 microg/mL] was detected at frequency of 18.8%, which was higher than that in the last year. Against Klebsiella pneumoniae, CZOP, meropenem (MEPM), and carumonam (CRMN) showed the strongest activity and prevented the growth of all strains with 0.125 microg/mL or less. The antibacterial activity of the other cephems was relatively good, and decrease in their activity observed in the last year study was not recognized. Against Serratia marcescens, imipenem (IPM) and gentamicin (GM) had the strongest antibacterial activity. Against Proteus mirabilis, CRMN showed the strongest activity and prevented the growth of all strains with 0.125 microg/mL or less. MEPM prevented the growth of all strains with 0.25 microg/mL. Next, cefmenoxime (CMX), ceftazidime (CAZ), CZOP, cefixime (CFIX), cefpodoxime (CPDX), and cefditoren (CDTR) showed a strong activity. The antibacterial activity of the drugs to Pseudomonas aeruginosa was generally low, and MIC90 of all the drugs was ranged from 32 to > 128 microg/mL except IPM and MEPM having 16 microg/mL. The antibacterial activities of CZOP and CAZ were considered to be relatively good on MIC50 comparison (MIC50: 2 microg/mL).