The aim of this study was to gather more information on the spread of VTEC serotypes, genetic profiles and resistance patterns from pigs or pork and from cattle or beef in different areas, and to improve detection of the source of outbreaks with a wider data pool. Of 130 Escherichia coli samples isolated from a cattle slaughter house and beef retail products in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), seven were identified as verotoxigenic (VTEC). In comparison, 22 VTEC of 264 E. coli isolates were isolated from bovine faeces (14) and beef products (8) from Germany. Furthermore 23 VTEC of 76 isolates were identified from pig carcasses (10), faeces (9) and pork products (4) from Germany. Gene detection and serotyping were carried out in our laboratory and in the National Reference Laboratory. Antimicrobial resistance was tested with the dilution method in microtitre plates. All porcine isolates belonged to serotypes thus far not associated with human disease. Bovine VTEC were either serotypes commonly associated with human diseases (O157:H7, O103:H2, O157:H-) or rare serotypes. One serotype (O96:H19) was found only in isolates from Sarajevo. Most German VTEC, especially those of porcine origin, had only vtx2 genes, whereas all Bosnian isolates had vtx1 and vtx2 genes. The eae gene was found only in "classical" VTEC serotypes. All 52 VTEC (100%) investigated were resistant to the three sulfonamides tested; porcine isolates were mainly resistant to oxytetracycline (43%) and chlortetracycline (37%), bovine isolates mainly to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and ampicillin (10% each). If sulfonamide resistances are disregarded, more than half (53.8%) of porcine VTEC were multiresistant and one-fourth (25%) of German bovine isolates, but none of the Bosnian bovine isolates. The results show the considerable spread of resistances in VTEC. These results also point out the necessity of gathering data from different geographical areas in order to be able to identify typical local variations in serotypes or gene expression and thus to trace human infections more quickly to their source.