AIMS: To determine the mechanisms of Bacillus subtilis spore resistance to and killing by a novel sporicide, dimethyldioxirane (DMDO) that was generated in situ from acetone and potassium peroxymonosulfate at neutral pH. METHODS AND RESULTS: Spores of B. subtilis were effectively killed by DMDO. Rates of killing by DMDO of spores lacking most DNA protective alpha/beta-type small, acid-soluble spore proteins (alpha- beta- spores) or the major DNA repair protein, RecA, were very similar to that of wild-type spore killing. Survivors of wild-type and alpha- beta- spores treated with DMDO also exhibited no increase in mutations. Spores lacking much coat protein due either to mutation or chemical decoating were much more sensitive to DMDO than were wild-type spores, but were more resistant than growing cells. Wild-type spores killed with this reagent retained their large pool of dipicolinic acid (DPA), and the survivors of spores treated with DMDO were sensitized to wet heat. The DMDO-killed spores germinated with nutrients, albeit more slowly than untreated spores, but germinated faster than untreated spores with dodecylamine. The killed spores were also germinated by very high pressures and by lysozyme treatment in hypertonic medium, but many of these spores lysed shortly after their germination, and none of these treatments were able to revive the DMDO-killed spores. CONCLUSIONS: DMDO is an effective reagent for killing B. subtilis spores. The spore coat is a major factor in spore resistance to DMDO, which does not kill spores by DNA damage or by inactivating some component needed for spore germination. Rather, this reagent appears to kill spores by damaging the spore's inner membrane in some fashion. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This work demonstrates that DMDO is an effective decontaminant for spores of Bacillus species that can work under mild conditions, and the killed spores cannot be revived. Evidence has also been obtained on the mechanisms of spore resistance to and killing by this reagent.