Multiple resistance to benzimidazole, imidazothiazole and macrocyclic lactone anthelmintics is an emerging problem in the south-east of Scotland. The general management and nematode control strategies employed in four affected flocks (flocks 1-4) were investigated in an attempt to identify the risk factors which might have led to the appearance of production limiting disease associated with anthelmintic resistance. The important risk factors for multiple anthelmintic resistance could not be confirmed and it proved easier to criticise nematode control practices on theoretical grounds, than to propose practical solutions. It seems likely that different risk factors were involved in the four flocks. Lambs in flocks 1 and 2 had been treated with an anthelmintic at 3-4 weekly intervals with the aim of achieving suppressive nematode control, while sheep in flock 1 had been treated with an anthelmintic after they were moved onto clean grazing. Recently lambed ewes had been treated with moxidectin in three of the four flocks, with the aim of controlling their periparturient rise in faecal nematode egg output. All of these factors might have contributed to the emergence of multiple anthelmintic resistance, because they could have led to anthelmintic treatments at times when the nematode population in refugia was small, compared to that in the sheep. Annual rotation of the anthelmintic group was compromised by the emergence of benzimidazole resistance and did not prevent the emergence of multiple resistance in any of the flocks described, although the practice may have slowed the development of resistance. Underdosing may have selected for benzimidazole and imidazothiazole resistance in flock 2, associated with inaccurate estimation of the weights of terminal sire lambs. These investigations also highlighted problems associated with the diagnosis of anthelmintic resistance, in particular the confounding effects of the onset of host immunity to nematode parasites, the possible influence of the age of the adult nematode population, and the insensitivity of the undifferentiated faecal egg count reduction test in situations where resistance is emerging.