There has been a significant advance in the treatment of chronic Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and the following drugs were approved for therapy: Conventional interferon (IFN), pegylated interferon alfa-2a (PEG IFN alpha2a), lamivudine, adefovir and entecavir. Compared to nucleoside analogues IFN induces higher rates of sustained remission and HBsAg loss. Conventional IFN in lower doses (1, 5-3 MIU) tiw for 4-6 mo has similar efficacy in comparison to "standard IFN therapy". Longer IFN treatment is a significant factor for long-term remission in HBeAg-negative CHB, but the higher actual IFN dose is not such a factor. PEG IFN is superior to conventional IFN. There is no significant difference between PEG IFN alpha2a at doses 90 mcg/wk and 180 mcg/wk in HBeAg-positive patients. These results provide a rational for further clinical trials with lower doses PEG IFN alpha2a given in prolonged course as maintenance or intermittent treatment. Serious new problems arose after the introduction of nucleoside/nucleotide analogues in clinical practice. The most important ones are drug-resistance and the high rates of relapse after treatment discontinuation. Therapy should only be recommended if the expected benefit exceeds significantly the abstain from treatment. The choice of therapy should take into account the patient's age, co-morbidity, severity of liver disease and the risk of drug-resistance. New antivirals significantly suppress HBV-replication, but have no effect on cccDNA in hepatocytes, and after the treatment discontinuation viral relapses occurs. At the present level of knowledge it is impossible "to eradicate the virus" The realistic treatment goal is to achieve durable response by clearance of HBeAg, sustained decrease of serum HBV DNA levels, normalization of ALT, improvement of liver histology and stopping of liver fibrogenesis. The competition between IFN based therapy and nucleoside or nucleotide analogues still remains. IFN can cure the liver disease while nucleotide analogues only suppress the viral replication during therapy and can reduce the liver fibrosis. Treatment should be prolonged for 24-mo or longer by using maintenance or intermittent treatment course with the lowest effective IFN and PEG IFN doses. Nucleoside/nucleotide analogues are a promising treatment option, but additional data for treatment duration and long-term post-treatment outcome are necessary.