Nisin-producing Lactococcus lactis protects its own cell membrane against the bacteriocin with the ABC transporter NisFEG, and the immunity lipoprotein NisI. In this study, in order to localize a site for specific nisin interaction in NisI, a C-terminal deletion series of NisI was constructed, and the C-terminally truncated NisI proteins were expressed in L. lactis. The shortest deletion (5 aa) decreased the nisin immunity capacity considerably in the nisin-negative strain MG1614, resulting in approximately 78% loss of immunity function compared with native NisI. A deletion of 21 aa decreased the immunity level even more, but longer deletions, up to 74 aa, provided the same level of nisin immunity as the 21 aa deletion, i.e. approximately 14% of the immunity provided by native NisI. Similar to native NisI, all the C-terminally truncated NisI proteins provided higher immunity to nisin in the NisFEG-expressing strain NZ9840 than in MG1614, i.e. approximately 40-50% of the immunity capacity of native NisI. Then, it was determined whether the NisI C-terminal 21 aa fragment could protect cells against nisin. To target the 21 aa fragment to its natural location, 21 C-terminal amino acids from the subtilin-specific immunity lipoprotein SpaI were replaced by 21 C-terminal amino acids from NisI. The expression of the SpaI'-'NisI fusion in L. lactis strains significantly increased their nisin immunity. This is the first time the immunity function of a lantibiotic immunity protein has been transferred to another protein. However, unlike native NisI, and the C-terminally truncated NisI fragments, the increase in nisin immunity conferred by the SpaI'-'NisI fusion was the same in both the NisFEG strain NZ9840 and MG1614. In conclusion, the SpaI'-'NisI fusion could not enhance nisin immunity by interacting with NisFEG, whereas the C-terminally truncated NisI fragments and native NisI were able to enhance nisin immunity, probably by co-operation with NisFEG. The results made it evident that the C terminus of NisI is involved in specific interaction with nisin, and that it confers specificity for the NisI immunity lipoprotein.