INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to assess the evolution of the population MICs for various antimicrobial drugs against Neisseria meningitidis isolates obtained from asymptomatic carriers during a chemoprophylaxis campaign carried out for an epidemic outbreak of meningococcal disease in Nerva, a small town in Huelva province (Spain). MATERIAL AND METHODS: A nasopharyngeal carrier study including 427 people was carried out to determine the incidence rate of the epidemic strain among the general population. On the basis of the results, chemoprophylaxis with rifampicin was administered to the population aged 15 to 29 years (age group showing the highest incidence of the epidemic strain among carriers) living in Nerva. Three months later a new carrier study was performed (507 people) to evaluate the effects of chemoprophylaxis. Given the evolution of the outbreak, seven months later a new intervention was required with ciprofloxacin chemoprophylaxis; a second carrier study (399 people) was performed two months later to evaluate its effect. RESULTS: The number of strains isolated during the three carrier studies was 59 (13.8%), 33 (6.5%), and 22 (5.5%), respectively. Analysis of the changes in the MIC50 and MIC90 for the various antibiotics from the first to the second carrier study (rifampicin chemoprophylaxis) showed statistical differences only in the distribution of rifampicin MICs. Similarly, when changes from the second to the third study were analyzed (ciprofloxacin chemoprophylaxis), significant variations were detected for the cefotaxime MICs. Nevertheless, although there were changes in the MICs, the percentages of susceptibility from the beginning to the end of the study did not vary. CONCLUSIONS: Massive chemoprophylaxis in the age group with the highest incidence of the epidemic strain among carriers did not clearly modify the antibiotic susceptibility of the isolates. However, a slight increase in the MIC50 and MIC90 was observed for rifampicin after the first chemoprophylactic intervention and for cefotaxime at the end of the study. Consecutive chemoprophylactic interventions with rifampicin and ciprofloxacin had an impact on the percentage of meningococcal carriers in the overall population, with a clearly decreasing trend.