OBJECTIVE: To determine whether a multimodal intervention could improve adherence to hand hygiene and glove use recommendations and decrease the incidence of antimicrobial resistance in different types of healthcare facilities. DESIGN: Prospective, observational study performed from October 1, 1999, through December 31, 2002. We monitored adherence to hand hygiene and glove use recommendations and the incidence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria among isolates from clinical cultures. We evaluated trends in and predictors for adherence and preferential use of alcohol-based hand rubs, using multivariable analyses. SETTING: Three intervention hospitals (a 660-bed acute and long-term care hospital, a 120-bed community hospital, and a 600-bed public teaching hospital) and a control hospital (a 700-bed university teaching hospital).Intervention. At the intervention hospitals, we introduced or increased the availability of alcohol-based hand rub, initiated an interactive education program, and developed a poster campaign; at the control hospital, we only increased the availability of alcohol-based hand rub. RESULTS: We observed 6,948 hand hygiene opportunities. The frequency of hand hygiene performance or glove use significantly increased during the study period at the intervention hospitals but not at the control hospital; the maximum quarterly frequency of hand hygiene performance or glove use at intervention hospitals (74%, 80%, and 77%) was higher than that at the control hospital (59%). By multivariable analysis, preferential use of alcohol-based hand rubs rather than soap and water for hand hygiene was more likely among workers at intervention hospitals compared with nonintervention hospitals (adjusted odds ratio, 4.6 [95% confidence interval, 3.3-6.4]) and more likely among physicians (adjusted odds ratio, 1.4 [95% confidence interval, 1.2-1.8]) than among nurses at intervention hospitals. A significantly reduced incidence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria among isolates from clinical culture was found at a single intervention hospital, which had the greatest increase in the frequency of hand hygiene performance. CONCLUSIONS: During a 3-year period, a multimodal intervention program increased adherence to hand hygiene recommendations, especially to the use of alcohol-based hand rubs. In one hospital, a concomitant reduction was found in the incidence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria among isolates from clinical cultures.