UNLABELLED: Although many studies have highlighted the problem of biofilm growth in dental chair unit waterlines (DUWs), no long-term studies on the efficacy of DUW disinfection using a large number of dental chair units (DCUs) have been reported. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the long-term (21 months) efficacy of the Planmeca Waterline Cleaning System (WCS) to maintain the quality of DUW output water below the American Dental Association (ADA) recommended standard of < or =200cfu/mL of aerobic heterotrophic bacteria using once weekly disinfection with the hydrogen peroxide-and silver ion-containing disinfectant Planosil. METHODS: Microbiological quality of DUW output water was monitored by culture on R2A agar for 10 DCUs fitted with the WCS. The presence of biofilm in DUWs was examined by electron microscopy. RESULTS: During the first 9 months a high prevalence (28/300 disinfection cycles; 9.3%) of intermittent DUW disinfection failure occurred in 8/10 DCUs due to operator omission to disinfect all DUWs (10/28 failed cycles), incorrect compressed air pressure failing to distribute the disinfectant properly (4/28 failed cycles) and physical blockage of disinfectant intake valves due to corrosion effects of Planosil (14/28 failed cycles). On rectification of these faults through engineering redesign and procedural changes, no further cases of intermittent DUW disinfection failure were observed. Independently of these factors, a rapid and consistent decline in efficacy of DUW disinfection occurred in 4/10 DCUs following the initial 9 months of once weekly disinfection. There was a highly significant difference (P<0.0001) in the prevalence of strongly catalase-positive Novosphingobium and Sphingomonas bacterial species (mean average prevalence of 37.1%) in DUW output water from these 4 DCUs compared to the other 6 DCUs and DCU supply water (prevalence <1%), which correlated with biofilm presence in the DUWs and indicated selective pressure for maintenance of these species by prolonged disinfectant usage. Planosil was reformulated to a more concentrated form (Planosil Forte) and when used once weekly was found to maintain bacterial density in output water below the ADA standard for all 10 DCUs. CONCLUSIONS: A variety of factors can contribute to failure of DUW disinfection in the long-term, including human error, disinfectant corrosion of equipment and natural selection of naturally disinfectant-tolerant bacterial species.