Recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis affects women worldwide and the resistance to azole drugs may be an important factor. The extent of strain-to-strain variation within a species and its relationship to the ability of the organism to colonize the vulvovaginal mucosa is not well established. The aims of this study were to compare: (i) the genotypes of Candida strains in sequential infections in patients with recurrent vaginitis, (ii) the genotypes of strains in patients with only one episode of infection in a period of 1 year and (iii) determine the in vitro antifungal susceptibilities of strains that cause recurrent vaginitis. Fifty-one cultured specimens from six distinct Candida species were genotyped via random amplified polymorphic DNA-polymerase chain reaction (RAPD-PCR) method using the ERIC1 and ERIC2 primers (ERIC, enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus). Statistical analyses allowed three different scenarios to be discerned for recurrent cases: (i) strain maintenance without genetic variation, (ii) strain maintenance with minor genetic variation and (iii) outright strain replacement. The genetic relatedness between strains from patients with recurrent vaginitis and patients with single episode of vaginitis were demonstrated by the dendogramme and the mean pairwise similarity coefficient S(AB) for the intergroup comparison was 0.223. However, intragroup genetic relatedness was slightly higher than intergroup comparison, with mean S(AB) of 0.261 and 0.331 for Groups I and II, respectively. A high proportion of Group I isolates (87.5%) causing recurrent infections were resistant to ketoconazole, whereas 41.7% of these isolates were cross-resistant to both clotrimazole and ketoconazole as shown by the in vitro antifungal susceptibility test, especially for C. glabrata isolates. Pregnancy status of patients displayed a highly significant association with C. albicans species whereas non-albicans species had a markedly higher prevalence in non-pregnant patients (p<0.001). These results may have a profound impact on the management of vaginal candidiasis, especially in recurrent cases.