BACKGROUND: There are few studies of the pharmacokinetics of vancomycin and gentamicin in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients and the influence of antibiotic concentrations on treatment outcome. Concerns about resistance to ceftazidime and potential of aminoglycoside toxicity make the choice of empiric antibiotic difficult. METHODS: We retrospectively collected data from 613 patients on PD between 1 June 2002 and 31 December 2005. During this time, we adopted a protocol that minimized aminoglycoside exposure to patients with residual renal function and carefully monitored serum antibiotic concentrations. RESULTS: There were no statistical differences in mean day-5 vancomycin concentrations for continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) vs automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) and for anuric vs not-anuric patients. However, low levels (<12 mg/l) were recorded for 12.8% CAPD and 15% APD patients. These remained low at day 10 in 16% patients (25% if not anuric) despite incremental dosing. Vancomycin concentration did not predict cure or relapse of Gram-positive or culture-negative peritonitis. Gentamicin concentration (>2 mg/l in >50% patients) did not predict outcome of Gram-negative and culture-negative peritonitis. Moreover, cure rates were the same irrespective of whether gentamicin was continued for 14 days or was switched to ceftazidime after 5 days. CONCLUSION: We have confirmed that the International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis (ISPD) dosing guideline for vancomycin in CAPD and APD patients produces adequate serum concentrations of the antibiotics in the vast majority. However, large incremental dosing of vancomycin is needed if day-5 levels are low; especially for not-anuric patients. Whilst evidence of gentamicin toxicity in PD remains controversial, ISPD dosing regimen resulted in high levels for >50% patients. High gentamicin concentrations did not correlate with treatment success, but switching gentamicin to ceftazidime at day 5 appeared safe and limited aminoglycoside exposure. Increasing vancomycin and gentamicin concentrations do not appear to improve cure rates and alternative strategies (such as combination treatment) should be considered for future research.