PURPOSE: To evaluate treatment results of Rifampicin (R) resistant Isoniazid (H) susceptible tuberculosis cases. METHOD: Cohort analysis of twenty-three H susceptible R resistant tuberculosis cases started treatment in 1985-2004 at Fukujuji Hospital, by the retrospective review. RESULTS: Three cases became Multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR TB), seventeen cases were cured, two cases died, and one case transferred out. One started treatment with HR became MDR, one of the two started treatment with HR+ Ethambutol (E) became MDR and one of them was cured, eight among ten cases started treatment with HR+Pyrazinamide + (E or Streptomycine (S)) were cured, one among the ten died and one among the ten transferred out, one started treatment with RZE was cured, three among the five cases started treatment with three effective drugs without Z were cured, one among the five died, one among the five became MDR. Three cases started treatment with four effective drugs were cured. Among the nineteen cases continued treatment for more than six months, ten cases treated with four or five effective drugs for at least two months were cured, two cases of nine cases treated with three drugs or less became MDR, seven of the nine cases were cured. Among the same nineteen cases, eleven cases not treated with two or less effective drugs were cured, one case treated with two or less effective drugs for six months became MDR and one of them treated with one or two effective drug for one to three months became MDR and some were cured. The used drugs were H, E, Pyrazinamide, Streptomycin, Kanamycin, Ethionamide and New Quinolones. The duration of treatment of cured cases were eleven to twelve months in 3 cases, twelve to eighteen months in 3 cases, eighteen to twenty-four months in 8 cases and more than two years in 3 cases. CONCLUSION: If the starting regimen is HRZE, we can cure R resistant H susceptible tuberculosis by the use of four effective drugs for more than two months and at least three effective drugs with the total duration of treatment for twelve to twenty-four months.