In the present day scenario of resurgence of infectious diseases, malaria compounded with problems of multi drug resistance, assumes paramount importance. A combination of artemisinine derivatives with other effective anti-malarial drug remains the most effective form of treatment against the falciparum malaria which is most lethal form of disease. Oral chloroquin in the dose of 25 mg base/kg over 48 hours is effective in infections due to P. vivax, P. ovale P. malariae and chloroquine sensitive P. Falciparum. For chloroquine resistant P. vivax and multidrug resistant falciparum malaria, a combination of Quinine with doxycycline or clindamycin for 5-7 days, Quinine with singlt dose sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine combination. Mefloquine with artemeter or artesunate for 3 days, artesunate with doxycycline or clindamycin for 7 days and Otovaquin with proguanil for 3 days have been found to be effective. Primiquin as a hypnozoticide for 5-10 days is mandatory for preventing relapse in cases of P. vivax, P. Ovale and P. malariae. Death due to complicated malaria can be as high as 75% if case diagnosis is delayed or the patient arrives late. The artemisinine based rectal suppositories can be very effective in home/village setting in patients who can not be given oral anti malarial, though not yet approved for use in our country. In ICU settings, properly administered loading dose of quinine has proved to be effective and safe in almost all therapeutic trials including our study on Indian patients. Frequent blood glucose monitoring is mandatory. Parentral artemisinine with oral mefloquine is an effective alternative to quinine based therapy. The cerebral malaria management in the ICU setting includes monitoring fluid and electrolyte balance so as to maintain a CVP of 5 cm of water and pulmonary arterial occlusive pressure at less than 15 mm of mercury. In renal failure haemofiltration is ideal. Mefloquine is safe in second and third trimester of pregnancy. Exchange transfusion, haemopheresis and plasmapheresis are new techniques in the treatment of gravely ill patients with PF malaria especially when parasitemia exceeds 10%.