Mutation of the P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (PfCRT) causes resistance to chloroquine (CQ) and other antimalarial drugs. Mutation and/or overexpression of one of the multidrug resistance protein homologues found in this malarial parasite (PfMDR1) may further modify or tailor the degree of multidrug resistance. However, considerable controversy surrounds the precise contribution of PfMDR1, in part because no direct biochemical studies of PfMDR1 have yet been possible. Using codon optimization and other principles, we have designed and constructed a yeast optimized version of the wild type pfmdr1 gene and have successfully overexpressed PfMDR1 protein in P. pastoris yeast. The protein is well expressed in either full length form or as two separate half transporters, is well localized to the yeast plasma membrane and is fully functional as evidenced by ATPase activity measurements. We have also expressed mutants that have previously been hypothesized to influence drug resistance in parasites. Using purified plasma membrane fractions, we have analyzed antimalarial drug effects on ATPase activity for wild type versus mutant proteins. Relative to other ABCB transporters involved in drug resistance, PfMDR1 is unusual. It has similar pH, [ATP], and Mg++ dependencies for ATP hydrolysis, yet relatively high Km and Vmax values for ATP hydrolysis, and ATPase activity is only mildly stimulated by antimalarial drugs. The largest measured drug effect is for CQ (to which PfMDR1 is not believed to confer resistance), and it is strongly inhibitory for WT PfMDR1. Drug resistance associated PfMDR1 mutants show either elevated (Dd2 allele encoded) or reduced (7G8 allele) basal ATPase activity and different patterns of drug stimulation or inhibition, relative to WT PfMDR1. The Dd2 PfMDR1 isoform also shows a slightly more alkaline pH optimum. Surprisingly, verapamil alone (1-300 microM) does not significantly affect WT ATPase activity but inhibits the Dd2 isoform at 1 microM. These data should assist ongoing analysis of the contribution of PfMDR1 to antimalarial drug resistance.