OBJECTIVE: To carry out an exploratory evaluation of liver triglyceride content in HIV-1-infected patients receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy and to study how both the treatment itself and the biochemical and physiological variables in which the treatment causes alterations are related to liver fat content. METHODS: Intracellular hepatic triglyceride content was determined in 29 HIV-1-infected patients on their first HAART regime by means of localized water-unsuppressed single voxel proton spectra. Other measurements were body mass index, waist-to-hip ratio, lipodystrophy assessment and a detailed blood biochemical analysis. The relationship between intracellular hepatic triglycerides and relevant descriptive, treatment and biochemical variables was studied by correlation and regression analysis. RESULTS: Intrahepatic triglycerides were detected in 58.6% of the patients and 13.8% showed a triglyceride content compatible with liver steatosis. Many variables (body mass index, waist-to-hip ratio, cumulative exposure to PIs, lactate, insulin, insulin resistance measured by the homeostasis model assessment method [HOMA-R index], pH, total triglycerides, high density lipoprotein cholesterol and very low density lipoprotein [VLDL] cholesterol) correlated individually with the amount of triglycerides. Stepwise multiple regression analysis showed that the combination of insulin or HOMA-R index and VLDL cholesterol accounted for up to 50.2% of the triglyceride liver variance. A positive relationship was found between the concomitant presence of the metabolic syndrome components (insulin resistance, dyslipidaemia and central obesity) and intrahepatic triglyceride content. CONCLUSIONS: The study showed that intrahepatic triglyceride deposit appears to be a frequent feature of HIV-1-infected patients receiving HAART. A coherent multifactorial combination of biochemical and physiological factors associated with the deposit suggested that cumulative exposure to PIs might be a possible trigger event.