BACKGROUND: The study investigated the pharmacokinetics of fosmidomycin when given alone and in combination with clindamycin in patients with acute uncomplicated falciparum malaria. METHODS: A total of 15 and 18 patients with acute uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria who fulfilled the enrollment criteria were recruited from out-patient department of Mae Sot Hospital, Tak Province, Thailand. Patients were treated with monotherapy with fosmidomycin at the dose of 1,200 mg every 8 hours for 7 days (n = 15) or combination therapy with fosmidomycin (900 mg every 12 hours for 7 days) and clindamycin (600 mg every 12 hours for 7 days) (n = 18). Blood samples were taken for pharmacokinetic investigations of clindamycin and/or fosmidomycin and 24-hour urine samples were collected during dosing period. Efficacy assessments included clinical and parasitological evaluation. Safety and tolerability were assessed based on clinical and laboratory investigations. RESULTS: Both mono- and combination therapy regimens of fosmidomycin were well tolerated with no serious adverse events. Combination therapy with fosmidomycin and clindamycin was proven highly effective with 100% cure rate, whereas cure rate of monotherapy was 22% (28-day follow up). Pharmacokientics of fosmidomycin following mono- and combination therapy were similar except Vz/F and CL/F, which were significantly smaller in the combination regimen. Plasma concentration-time profiles of both fosmidomycin and clindamycin were best fit with a one-compartment open model with first-order absorption and elimination and with absorption lag time. Steady-state plasma concentrations of fosmidomycin and clindamycin were attained at about the second or third dose. There was no evidence of dose accumulation during multiple dosing. Urinary recovery of fosmidomycin was 18.7 and 20% following mono- and combination therapy, respectively. CONCLUSION: Pharmacokinetic dose optimization of fosmidomycin-clindamycin combination therapy with the course of treatment of not longer than three days is required to obtain a regimen which is safe and produced 100% cure for multidrug-resistant P. falciparum.