The hepatitis C virus core protein plays an extremely important role in the hepatocarcinogenesis of hepatitis C virus. Little, however, is known about the oncogenic potency of fragments. Thus, the purpose of the present study is to investigate the cancerogenic effects of the different core protein fragments. Two series of recombinant plasmids containing hepatitis C virus core gene fragments encoding the different-length core protein were constructed using plasmid enhanced green fluorescent protein (pEGFP)-C1 and pcDNA3.1(+), respectively. Human hepatocyte L02 cells transiently transfected with pEGFP-C1-based plasmids were subjected to confocal laser scanning microscopy analysis to determine the localization of the different core protein fragments. The stably transfected L02 cells with the pcDNA3.1(+)-based core protein plasmids were used to investigate the ultrastructural effects of the core protein and the tumorigenicity of L02 cells expressing core protein fragments in athymic nude mice. The full-length core protein and Core130-191 were completely localized in the cytoplasm, while Core1-59 existed exclusively in the nucleus. On the other hand, Core50-140 and Core1-140 were observed in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Ultrastructural changes of L02 cells expressing the full-length core protein were comprehensive and included, for example, irregular nuclear, increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and mitochondria swelling. The slight changes were observed in the cells expressing Core50-140 and Core130-191, whereas the ultrastructure of the cells expressing Core1-59 remained normal. All the L02 cells stably expressing different fragments of the core protein, with the exception of the C-terminal truncated fragment Core1-59, could induce the occurrence of tumor in the nude mice. The N-terminal fragment of the core protein, Core1-59, was not oncogenic, while the intermediate and posterior segments of the hepatitis C virus core protein had the cancerogenic potency. In view of the existence of many important immunogenic epitopes in it, the core protein anterior segment might be a safer candidate for the development of hepatitis C virus vaccine.