OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the accuracy of drug susceptibility testing to isoniazid with BACTEC MGIT 960 (MGIT AST) comparing with the standard proportion method using Ogawa medium. METHOD: A total of 1109 M. tuberculosis strains, which were selected from the collection of RYOKEN drug resistance survey in 2002, were selected and subjected to the susceptibility testing to isoniazid using MGIT AST and 1% Ogawa standard methods. The results from MGIT AST were compared with the judicial diagnosis by Ogawa. The sensitivity to detect drug resistance, the specificity for susceptible strain, the efficiency of overall agreement, and kappa coefficient were calculated to evaluate the performance. The treatment process, outcome and prognosis were analysed for the patients on whom the tests showed discrepant results. RESULTS: Compared with the judicial results, the sensitivity, specificity, efficiency, and kappa coefficient of MGIT AST were 100%, 97.1%, 97.3%, and 0.798, respectively. The strains, which showed discrepant results between MGIT AST and Ogawa, were all susceptible by Ogawa and resistant by MGIT AST. A total of 11 out of 30 discrepant cases were followed clinically and no relapse cases were identified, irrespective of the modification of the treatment regimen. As for the proportion of primary INH drug resistance in the present study, it was 5.3% with MGIT AST but was 2.7% with Ogawa, and the difference was statistically significant (p = 0.005). DISCUSSION: The discrepancies on the results of drug susceptibility testing of M. tuberculosis strains to isoniazid between MGIT AST and 1% Ogawa proportion method have been reported. In the present study, the sensitivity, specificity, and overall efficiency of MGIT AST on the prevalent strains in Japan were all beyond 95%, and considered sufficient as the anti-tuberculosis drug susceptibility testing (AST), though 2.7% of discrepancy was observed. Even for the discrepant cases, there was no difference in the treatment outcome and prognosis. Thus, MGIT AST was confirmed as a reliable AST method comparable to Ogawa standard. However, MGIT AST might increase the proportion of INH resistance if it was used as a major AST method, compared with Ogawa.