AIM: Patients in nursing homes are becoming more and more elderly and also prone to infectious diseases. It is important to select proper antimicrobial agents in treating such patients because of the increase in drug-resistant bacteria in recent years. METHODS: Pathogenic aerobic bacteria were isolated from cultures of the pharyngeal swab obtained from patients with acute febrile episodes and those with chronic febrile conditions with a repetition of fever or continuing low-grade fever. Isolation of pathogens was also carried out in patients with a urinary tract infection that was resistant to treatment. Isolated bacteria were tested for sensitivity to commonly used antimicrobial agents. RESULTS: Pathogenic bacteria were isolated from 33% of the patients with acute febrile episodes, while they were isolated from 75% of the patients with chronic febrile conditions. The number of major pathogenic bacteria from 85 isolates were methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) 13, methicillin-sensitive staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) 6, Streptococcus pneumoniae 8, beta-hemolytic streptococcus 5, Klebsiella pneumoniae 10, and Enterobacter cloacae 6. Only two isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae were penicillin-sensitive (PSSP), while the others were penicillin-resistant (PRSP) (1) or penicillin-insensitive (PISP) (5). Among these 8 isolates, 5 were resistant to levofloxacin (LVFX). Escherichia coli was isolated from the pharyngeal swab of 2 patients, one of the 2 isolates being resistant to LVFX. Escherichia coli was isolated from 5 patients with urinary tract infection and 5 of the 6 isolates were resistant to LVFX; with one of them being extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL). CONCLUSION: The frequency of isolation of antimicrobial-resistant pathogens was extremely high among elderly patients in our nursing home compared to values reported from a nation-wide survey recently carried out in Japan. In particular, attention should be focused on the resistance of bacteria to fluoroquinolones.