OBJECTIVES: To examine susceptibilities of Bacillus anthracis and related species to 24 antimicrobials using and concurrently comparing two methods. METHODS: Twenty-four antimicrobials were tested against 95 isolates of the Bacillus cereus group including 18 B. anthracis, 42 B. cereus, 5 Bacillus mycoides, 5 Bacillus mycoides/pseudomycoides, 6 Bacillus pseudomycoides and 19 Bacillus thuringiensis to determine their MICs, MIC ranges, MIC50s and MIC90s with Etest and Sensititre at 30 and 35 degrees C for 18, 24 and 48 h. RESULTS: Both methods yielded near-identical results at both temperatures for all antimicrobials except trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Resistance to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole in 97% (92/95) was not always evident until tests were incubated for 48 h at 30 degrees C. All B. anthracis isolates were susceptible to 22 antimicrobials and resistant to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole while three isolates were erythromycin-intermediate. Whereas the B. thuringiensis were resistant to the beta-lactams, two B. cereus, one B. mycoides, five B. pseudomycoides and two B. mycoides/pseudomycoides were susceptible. Three B. cereus were solely clindamycin-resistant. Of the seven erythromycin-intermediate or -resistant B. cereus, three were resistant to clindamycin and one was resistant to clarithromycin and clindamycin. One B. mycoides was intermediately resistant to quinupristin/dalfopristin and meropenem and one was clindamycin-resistant. All B. pseudomycoides were clindamycin-resistant with one quinupristin/dalfopristin-resistant. Two B. mycoides/pseudomycoides were intermediately resistant to quinupristin/dalfopristin and clindamycin and a third was intermediately resistant to clindamycin alone. All isolates were susceptible to chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin, gentamicin, levofloxacin, linezolid, moxifloxacin, rifampicin, streptomycin, tetracycline, tigecycline and vancomycin. CONCLUSIONS: This paper expands the list of therapeutic or prophylactic antimicrobials potentially effective against B. cereus group isolates using two testing methods that produced comparable results.