AIMS: Anemia is a well-known side effect of interferon therapy since interferons are potent inhibitors of erythropoiesis. The aim of this study was to compare the anemia associated with pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) (alpha2a versus alpha2b therapy in hemodialysis patients (HD) with chronic hepatitis C. METHODS: In order to study the anemia, doses of erythropoietic growth factors (EGF), hemoglobin (Hb) and erythropoietin resistance index (ERI) were compared at baseline and after PEG-IFN-alpha2a or alpha2b therapy in 16 HD patients with chronic C hepatitis. Pharmacokinetic studies were performed in 4 of those treated with PEG-IFN-alpha2b and 2 patients treated with PEG-IFN-alpha2a. Secondary end-points were viral response and serious adverse events. RESULTS: At 4-6 months after the beginning of therapy, both PEG-IFN-alpha induced a significant increment in the erythropoietin resistance index. This increment was significantly higher in patients treated with PEG-IFN-alpha2a when compared with alpha2b (45 vs 9.9, p = 0.012). The pharmacokinetics of PEG-IFN-alpha2a and alpha2b in HD patients were different, the C(max), C(min) and the area under the serum concentration time curve, were all higher in patients treated with PEG-IFN-alpha2a compared with PEG-INF-alpha2b. Discontinuation of therapy occurred in 2 (28.5%) of the 7 patients in the PEG-IFN-alpha2a group and in 4 (44%) of the 9 patients in the PEG-IFN-alpha2b group. Three (42%) subjects in the alpha2a group and 5 (55%) in the alpha2b group had a response at the end of the 48 weeks of therapy. In 4 (44.4%) of the 9 patients treated with alpha2b the viral response was sustained. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, patients treated with PEG-IFN-alpha2a have a major inhibitory effect on erythropoiesis. This could be explained by the different pharmacokinetic properties of PEG-IFN-alpha2a and alpha2b. Further studies are needed to clarify how these findings influence the efficacy, safety and cost-effectiveness of the PEG-IFN-alpha2.