BACKGROUND: Limited data exist concerning characteristics of community-acquired Staphylococcus aureus infections (CA-SAI) in central and eastern Kentucky. OBJECTIVE: To describe the incidence of community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) infections from January 1, 2004 through December 31, 2005, compare the number of CA-MRSA infections between years, and contrast treatment interventions and antibiotic susceptibility patterns of CA-SAI. METHODS: A concurrent and retrospective study was conducted in 125 patients less than 18 years of age with CA-SAI admitted to the hospital/clinic based on criteria from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Data on demographics, length of stay, antibiotic therapy, and antibiotic susceptibilities were collected. RESULTS: Seventy patients were included for analysis (CA-MRSA, n = 51; community-acquired methicillin-susceptible S. aureus [CA-MSSA], n = 19). No statistically significant differences were noted between the number of CA-MRSA infections and the total CA-SAI (9/15 in 2004 vs 42/55 in 2005; p = 0.15). Approximately 75% of patients with CA-SAI were admitted to the hospital with no significant difference in length of stay. Ninety percent of CA-SAI were skin and soft tissue infections. There was a significant difference between groups with cutaneous abscesses (CA-MRSA, n = 37 vs CA-MSSA, n = 6; p = 0.002). Greater than 95% of all isolates were susceptible to vancomycin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Half of CA-MRSA patients received inappropriate antibiotic therapy with beta-lactam antibiotics or clindamycin without confirmatory disk diffusion test. Twenty-five (49%) patients with CA-MRSA received surgical debridement (S/D) and/or incision and drainage (I/D) with concomitant antibiotic therapy. Four patients with CA-MRSA were rehospitalized for subsequent infections; all 4 received appropriate antibiotic therapy. CONCLUSIONS: A noticeable increase in CA-MRSA infections with cutaneous abscess between 2004 and 2005 was noted. In patients receiving inappropriate antibiotic therapy, treatment success was attributed to concomitant S/D and I/D. Further analysis should focus on the impact of antibiotic therapy alone or in combination with S/D and I/D on the incidence of subsequent CA-MRSA infections.