AIM: To estimate the prevalence of resistance to macrocyclic lactone (ML) anthelmintics over a 3-year period on sheep farms in the Taihape area, and to determine associations between the presence of ML resistance and farm management practices. METHODS: All farmers with >1,000 lambing ewes served by one veterinary practice in the Taihape area of the central North Island of New Zealand were invited to take part in the study (n=157); respondents were selected on their willingness to participate. Resistance to ML was measured during 2004-2006, using a standard faecal egg count reduction test (FECRT) and a half dose of oral ivermectin (IVM; 0.1 mg/kg; n=84). Additional FECRTs were conducted separately on some farms, using full doses of IVM (n=47), levamisole (LEV; n=49), a benzimidazole (BZ; n=76), and a BZ/LEV combination (n=42). Resistance was defined as <95% faecal nematode egg count reduction (FECR) 7-10 days post-treatment. Larval cultures were performed on pooled faecal samples from all pre- and post-treatment groups for which any positive faecal nematode egg counts (FEC) were recorded. To ascertain whether particular management or drenching strategies were associated with the presence of resistance, a questionnaire comprising 50 questions was developed, and each farmer interviewed individually. RESULTS: Of all farmers invited, 84/157 (54%) participated in this study. Based on undifferentiated FEC, ML resistance to the half-dose IVM was evident on 46/84 (55%) participating farms. The majority of these cases (71%) involved Ostertagia (Teladorsagia) circumcincta. Resistance was also evident to full doses of IVM on 22/47 (47%), BZ on 41/76 (54%), LEV on 18/49 (37%), and BZ/LEV on 2/42 (5%) farms. Positive associations (p<0.05) were evident between the presence of ML resistance and management practices, such as: weaning over half of the lambs onto paddocks not grazed by lambing ewes since June; not always returning lambs to the same paddock after drenching; and the use of visual signs to assess 'worminess'. Measuring drench efficacy in January to March rather than later in the year, and presence of resistance to BZ or LEV were associated with a higher apparent prevalence of ML resistance (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Anthelmintic resistance, and particularly ML resistance, was widespread on sheep farms in the Taihape area, and mostly involved O. circumcincta. The prevalence of resistance was lower on farms on which management practices, particularly those involving lambs, maintained refugia of unselected nematodes. Further investigation is required to develop control strategies which minimise selection for resistant worms, and how these may vary with climate.