We investigated the mechanisms involved in imipenem resistance in 23 clinical strains of Acinetobacter baumannii. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis showed the presence of a 30-kDa protein in imipenem-intermediate A. baumannii (IIAB) and imipenem-resistant A. baumannii (IRAB) strains; this protein was almost undetectable in imipenem-susceptible A. baumannii (ISAB) strains. The 30-kDa protein was identified as an OXA-51-like carbapenemase using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. Similar to other recent findings, bla(OXA-51-like) genes were found to exist in all 23 clinical strains; however, the transcript levels of bla(OXA-51-like) in the IIAB and IRAB were higher than in the ISAB strains using reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) and real-time RT-PCR assays. This change was due to the presence of an insertion sequence, ISAba1, upstream of bla(OXA-51-like) in the IIAB and IRAB strains that was not present in the ISAB strains. The introduction of bla(OXA-66) (a bla(OXA-51)(-like) gene), identified in ISAB ab1254 and IRAB ab1266, into Escherichia coli TOP10 cells resulted in 3.95-fold and 7.90-fold elevations in resistance to imipenem, respectively. Furthermore, when ISAB ab8 and ISAB ab1254 and their in vitro-selected imipenem-resistant mutants ISAB ab8(r) and ISAB ab1254(r) were compared, the results showed no change in the bla(OXA-66)/bla(OXA-51-like) gene sequences, in expression of the gene, and in the outer membrane protein profiles. However, there was a four- to eightfold reduction in imipenem resistance upon adding carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone. Taken together, these results suggest that the OXA-66/OXA-51-like carbapenemase contributes to intrinsic resistance to imipenem; however, drug export by an efflux pump may be more important and/or occur more frequently in imipenem-resistant A. baumannii. Furthermore, this is the first report of a Taiwanese strain of an OXA-66/OXA-51-like carbapenemase that confers imipenem resistance in A. baumannii.