Dermatologists and other healthcare providers need to be aware of the epidemiology, clinical features, management, and prevention of community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CAMRSA) infection. Currently, infection caused by CAMRSA is considered to represent a worldwide epidemic and infectious skin lesions are a frequent occurrence. Athletes, certain ethnic populations, children, homeless persons, homosexual men, household members of infected people, HIV-infected patients, intravenous drug abusers, military personnel, newborns, pregnant and postpartum women, tattoo recipients, and urban dwellers of lower socioeconomic status in crowded living conditions are individuals at increased risk of developing CAMRSA infection. Although the observed incidence of cutaneous CAMRSA lesions in patients with atopic dermatitis or other conditions that are characterized by a non-intact skin barrier is less than that reported in other groups of people at risk for this skin infection, close surveillance for the emergence of CAMRSA skin infection in children and adults with atopic dermatitis and other patients whose skin barrier is disrupted is justified since colonization by S. aureus in these individuals represents a potential reservoir for CAMRSA. It is also important to note that infection-associated risk factors are absent in many individuals who develop cutaneous CAMRSA infection. CAMRSA skin lesions are pleomorphic. The most common presentations of CAMRSA infection are abscess, cellulitis, or both. These infectious lesions are not uncommonly misinterpreted by the patient as spider bites or insect bites. Other manifestations of cutaneous CAMRSA infection are impetigo, folliculitis, and paronychia. Incision and drainage of abscesses, systemic antibacterial therapy, and adjunctive topical antibacterial treatment are the essential components of management of CAMRSA skin infections. At the initial visit, a bacterial culture of the infectious lesion is recommended to confirm identification of the pathogen and to determine antimicrobial susceptibility. Subsequently, based upon the reported antibacterial sensitivity, alteration (if necessary) of the patient's empiric systemic antimicrobial treatment can be initiated. Direct skin-to-skin transmission of the causative bacteria, damage to the skin's surface, sharing of personal items, and a humid environment are potential mechanisms for the acquisition and transmission of CAMRSA skin infection. The spread of cutaneous CAMRSA infection can potentially be prevented by incorporating personal, environmental, and healthcare measures that strive to eliminate the causes of acquisition and transmission of the bacteria.