OBJECTIVES: Although not recommended by practice guidelines, physicians frequently prescribe an antibiotic for adults with viral pharyngitis. The financial burden of this practice, from the payer's perspective, has not been previously evaluated. The purpose of this study was to estimate those expenditures. METHODS: A cost-of-illness study was performed to estimate annual expenditures of pharyngitis management from the payer's perspective. National Ambulatory Care Survey data were used to represent current patterns of ambulatory care visits and antibiotic prescriptions for adult pharyngitis. Direct and antibiotic resistance costs were summed to estimate total expenditures for pharyngitis management. Resistance costs were calculated using a model linking the effect of antibiotic consumption to the cost consequences of resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae infection. Sensitivity analyses compared cost outcomes of current practice, adherence to pharyngitis management guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), and nonantibiotic treatment. RESULTS: In the base-case analysis, reflecting current practice patterns, total expenditures were $1.2 billion with antibiotic resistance contributing 36% ($426 million). IDSA guideline adherence decreased costs to $559 million with resistance accounting for 6.8% ($37.9 million). Guideline adherence plus reducing office visits by 30% decreased costs to $372 million, with only 1.4% ($5.3 million) due to resistance. Additional cost-savings of $88 million were realized by using a nonantibiotic treatment strategy. CONCLUSIONS: Current practice imposed a substantial economic burden on the payer, while guideline adherence resulted in cost reductions, especially in terms of resistance, emphasizing that antibiotic prescribing habits have broad economic consequences. Relevant stakeholders, payers, physicians, and other health-care providers should revisit efforts to encourage adherence to pharyngitis guidelines to reduce health-care costs.