BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: HIV patients are overexposed to hospital environment, immune suppression, and antibiotic prophylaxes. Therefore, with HIV positive patients an increased risk for resistant bacterial rods is to be expected. The purpose of this case-control study was to determine the susceptibility patterns of pneumococci from adult patients in relation to their HIV status and to compare both patient groups. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between January 2001 and December 2005, samples from internal medicine patients of one university hospital laboratory were investigated on culture of Streptococcus pneumoniae and in case of a positive vial, a resistance test was done by agar diffusion method. All patients with culture-confirmed infection due to pneumococci underwent a standardized retrospective evaluation in regard to demographic and clinical characteristics including HIV status. RESULTS: A total amount of 135 Streptococcus pneumoniae cultures could be assigned to 64 HIV-positive (A) and 71 HIV-negative patients (B), with susceptibility results for 134 isolates. Full susceptibility was seen in 44 (69.8% [A]) versus 42 (59.2% [B]) samples, reduced susceptibility ("intermediate-susceptible") was found in eight (12.7% [A]) versus 17 (23.9% [B]). Eleven (17.5% [A]) and twelve (16.9% [B]), respectively, out of all pneumococci were tested resistant to at least one antibiotic. Among these, resistance to erythromycin was most relevant (11.1% [A] and 11.3% [B]). None of the tested rods was resistant to penicillin. All differences between groups for susceptibility testing were not found significant. HIV-negative patients were significantly older, needed more often hospitalization and intensive care, and cultures for pneumococci were more frequently positive in primary sterile materials, such as cerebrospinal fluid and blood. The difference concerning death within 28 days following positive sample was just not significant as well as in immune suppression status of patients. HIV patients experienced more frequently an infection relapse and were more frequently smokers. CONCLUSION: No obvious difference in pneumococci resistance patterns was observed between HIV-positive and HIV-negative adult patients. The absence of resistance to penicillin underscores the importance of beta-lactams in case of typical community-acquired pneumonia; therefore, this class of antibiotics should be included in treatment guidelines as first-line drugs also for HIV patients. HIV-negative controls of this study were more aged and suffered from a higher morbidity, however, the fact that they were not significantly less immune suppressed may be special character of a university hospital control patient group. HIV patients presented in an earlier stage of their pneumococcal disease, probably due to a direct access to tertiary hospital medical supply. A higher relapse rate underscores the importance of pneumococcal vaccination for HIV patients.