Isoniazid (INH, isonicotinic acid hydrazide) is one of the most commonly used anti-tubercular drugs. However, resistance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains to anti-mycobacterial agents including INH is an increasing problem worldwide. Development of new anti-mycobacterial agents thus has attracted attention. Five lipid derivatives of INH were prepared in this study. They formed monolayers at the air/water interface, and some nanostructures with different morphologies were obtained through molecular self-assembly in water. The derivatives included one fatty acyl derivative containing a 12-C hydrocarbon-long chain (1), three fatty alcohol derivatives with a succinyl as spacer and an 8, 12 or 16-C hydrocarbon-long chain (2, 3 and 4), and one tetrahydro-2H-1,3,5-thiadiazine-2-thione (THTT) derivative containing a 12-C hydrocarbon-long chain (5). The surface pressure-area isotherms depended on the volume and configuration of heads and the length of tails of derivatives. Compound 2 had a relatively large head and a short tail, easily standing uprightly at the interface. Under a certain surface pressure, the linear polar head groups of 3 could be partly squeezed out and insert into subphase because the length of heads were comparable to the one of tails. The very long tails of 4 always maintained above the interface and led to a high collapse pressure. Compound 5 possessed an extended and large head consisting of the THTT and INH groups so that the relatively short tails tilted at the interface and difficultly contact with each other. The THTT rings might be partly squeezed out and enter into air under a certain surface pressure. The self-assembly behaviours of derivatives in water depended on the molecular configuration and agreed with the corresponding monolayer behaviours. The flexible and medium-long tails (1 and 3) led to the derivatives to form nanoscale vesicles, though the short or very long tails did not (2 and 4). Interestingly, intermolecular hydrogen bonding could occur between the molecules of 5, and improve the derivative forming helical nanofibres other than vesicles. The molecular self-assembly of INH's lipid derivatives was explored in details in this study. The formation mechanisms of self-assembled nanostructures were analyzed. Various types of self-assembled nanostructures were obtained and the formation mechanisms were analyzed. The relationship between the self-assembly and the molecular configuration of amphiphilic derivatives was also revealed. The lipid derivatives of INH show promising anti-Mycobacterium action because the amphiphilic prodrugs allow for better penetration of the bacterial cells. The self-assembled nanostructures may likely be the potential self-assembled drug delivery systems for tuberculosis therapy.