AIM: To determine the resistance to antibiotics among the indictor bacteria, Escherichia coli and Enterococcus spp, isolated from the faeces of healthy pigs on three conventional pig farms and one organic farm in the North Island of New Zealand. METHODS: Faecal samples, collected at intervals between March and October 2001, were plated onto MacConkey agar and Slanetz-Bartley agar and examined after 1-3 days incubation for colonies resembling E. coli and Enterococcus spp, respectively. Typical colonies were subcultured for further identification and storage. The isolates were tested for antibiotic resistance, using disc diffusion, to ampicillin, gentamicin, streptomycin, and tetracycline. Escherichia coli isolates were also tested for resistance to ciprofloxacin, cotrimoxazole and neomycin. Enterococcus spp isolates were also tested for resistance to vancomycin, erythromycin and virginiamycin. RESULTS: A total of 296 E. coli and 273 Enterococcus spp isolates were obtained from the three conventional farms, and 79 E. coli and 80 Enterococcus spp isolates were obtained from the organic farm. All the E. coli isolates from both the conventional and organic pig farms were susceptible to ciprofloxacin, and all the Enterococcus spp isolates were susceptible to ampicillin, gentamicin and vancomycin. Isolates of E. coli from conventional pig farms were resistant to gentamicin (0.7%), neomycin (0.7%), ampicillin (2.7%), cotrimoxazole (11%), streptomycin (25%) and tetracycline (60%). Enterococcus spp isolates from the same farms were resistant to erythromycin (68%), tetracycline (66%), streptomycin (54%) and virginiamycin (49%). By contrast, for the organic pig farm <or=5% of either the E. coli or the Enterococcus spp isolates were resistant to any of the antibiotics tested. CONCLUSIONS: On commercial pig farms which used antimicrobial agents, there was a higher level of antimicrobial resistance in the E. coli and Enterococcus spp cultured from the faeces of pigs compared with an organic farm which used no antibiotics. Overall levels of antibiotic resistance in the indicator bacteria isolated from conventional pig farms in this study were similar to those reported for indicator bacteria from pigs in Europe.