OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to assess the pattern of bacterial resistance to antimicrobial agents in a hospital setting in Southwest Ethiopia. METHODS: The antimicrobial resistance pattern of common bacterial isolates was determined during January 2003 to July 2004. A total of 291 Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial strains were isolated from different clinical specimens. Specimens collected included ear discharges, throat and wound swabs, as well as urine, sputum, stool and blood The specimens were obtained from consecutively attending adults and children at the out patient departments of Jimma Hospital. The specimens were inoculated onto appropriate culture media. Targeted species were identified following standard procedures. Using different panels of antibiotics, susceptibility tests were performed using disc diffusion method as outlined by Kirby-Bauer method The profile of the commonly prescribed antimicrobial agents was studied in accordance with the principles established by the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. RESULTS: One hundred seventy six Gram-positive and 115 Gram-negative bacterial species were isolated. Of these included Staphylococcus aureus, Coagulase negative Staphylococci and Proteus species were isolated frequently in 72 (24.7%), 59 (20.3%) and 55 (18.9%) of the isolates, respectively. Antimicrobial susceptibility testes showed that methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus was found in 8.3% of the cases while methicillin resistant coaguuse negative staphylococci were detected in 10.3%. Of the Staphylococcus aureus isolates, 90.3% and 91.7% were resistant to penicillin and ampicillin, respectively. Two (7.1%) of S. pneumoniae strains and 100% of Enterococci were resistant to penicillin. Proteues spp were resistant to tetracycline, polymyxin B, chloramphenicol and ampicillin in 90.9%, 92.7%, 67.3% and 58.2%, respectively. Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp and Citrobacter and Enterobacter spp were 100% resistant to ampicillin. P. aeruginosa, E. coli, Proteus spp, S. aureus and Enterococci spp showed multiple drug resistance. All bacterial isolates were susceptible to ciprofloxacin. CONCLUSION: There is an increasing trend of antimicrobial resistance in some bacterial species. Ciprofloxacin was highly) effective antimicrobial agent in vitro against majority of the bacterial isolates. Health personnel should be aware and take necessary measures to control further increases in bacterial resistance to antibiotics.