From 1911 outpatients, who addressed a Timisoara private clinical laboratory, from January to December 2005, we collected 1,889 urine cultures, 431 being positive. Bacteria identification was generally done using morphological, cultural, biochemical characters and pathogenicity tests. Sensitivity testing to antimicrobial medical drugs was done by using the classical diffusion Kirby-Bauer method and the automatic analyzer Osiris, also. The main bacteria involved in the etiology of these infections were represented by Enterobacteriaceae, head of the list being Escherichia coli (81.21%), followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae (8.35%) and Proteus mirabilis (3.02%). We also isolated Gram positive cocci (in a much smaller proportion), mainly represented by Enterococcus faecalis (1.16%), Staphylococcus aureus (0.93%), Streptococcus agalactiae, and also Gram negative non-fermentative bacilli, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (0.93%) or Acinetobacter baumanii (0.23%). As soon as we performed the sensitivity tests, we divided them in resistance phenotypes: Most of the Enterobacteriaceae were integrated in the wild phenotype, followed by the penicillinase producing phenotype. An E. coli strain (0.29%) and 3 Klebsiella pneumoniae strains (8.33%) were integrated in the large spectrum, multidrug resistant, beta-lactamase producing phenotype, also associated with resistance to fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides; Non-fermentative bacilli did not present special resistance problems, the four Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains were integrated in the wild phenotype (secreting induced chromosomal cephalosporinase). As for Staphylococcus aureus it was identified a strain having fluoroquinolone resistance, two strains secreting penicillinase and having a K (Nm) phenotype and a strain secreting penicillinase only. Antibiotic resistance represents a major concern for patients, physicians, healthcare managers, and policymakers. The use of antibiotics is closely linked with the development of acquired antibiotic resistance.