OBJECTIVE: To summarize and evaluate the literature concerning ceftobiprole. DATA SOURCES: Literature identification was conducted through MEDLINE (1966-February 2008) and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-February 2008) using the terms ceftobiprole, medocaril, BAL 5788, RO-5788, BAL 9141, RO 63-9141, pyrrolidinone cephalosporin, MRSA, complicated skin and skin-structure infections (cSSSIs), community-acquired pneumonia, and nosocomial pneumonia. Additional publications were identified through a review of articles and abstracts from infectious disease meetings. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All articles in English were evaluated and all pertinent information was included. DATA SYNTHESIS: Ceftobiprole medocaril is an extended-spectrum cephalosporin with activity against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus spp., vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis, Enterobacteriaceae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Inactivity includes extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Enterobacteriaceae and Enterococcus faecium. Preliminary data suggest that ceftobiprole may be effective with a 1-hour infusion of 500 mg every 12 hours for gram-positive infections and 500 mg every 8 hours with a 2-hour infusion for polymicrobial infections. Two clinical trials support these dosing regimens for cSSSIs. Ceftobiprole was noninferior to vancomycin in suspected gram-positive cSSSIs, with cure rates of 93.3% and 93.5%, respectively. Furthermore, ceftobiprole was noninferior to vancomycin and ceftazidime in polymicrobial cSSSIs (cure rates 90.5% vs 90.2%, respectively). Although the total number of adverse effects was similar to those of the comparator, more patients in the ceftobiprole group experienced nausea, vomiting, and dysgeusia. CONCLUSIONS: The activity of ceftobiprole and limited clinical data suggest that it may be useful as empiric monotherapy for cSSSI and in combination with other antimicrobials in lower respiratory tract infections for which Phase 3 clinical trials are currently exploring. Although not shown in vitro, ceftobiprole may induce resistance due to its broad spectrum of activity. Approval is expected for the treatment of cSSSI.