In 2004-2006, 322 brood horses from 11 horse farms were examined using the faecal egg count reduction test (FECRT) to determine the presence and distribution of anthelmintic resistance in strongylids in Ukraine. The anthelmintic drugs "Albendazole-7.5" (7.5mg of albenazole, Ukraine) at a dose of 5mg per kg body weight and "Univerm" (0.2% aversectin C, Russia) at a dose of 0.5mg per kg body weight were used. Seventy-one horses from six farms were examined in vivo to investigate the influence of anthelmintic treatment on the gastrointestinal strongylid community structure. Horses were treated with anthelmintics; faecal sampling (200 g in each sample) for strongylid expulsion was performed 24, 36, 48 and 60 h after treatment; and all strongylids expelled (25,292 specimens) were collected and identified. Fourteen horses from the Dubrovsky horse farm were also examined to determine the benzimidazole-resistant cyathostomin species; 5208 specimens of benzimidazole-resistant cyathostomins were collected and identified. According to the FECRT data, benzimidazole resistance in strongylids was observed only at the Dubrovsky horse farm (FECRT=68.7%). No resistance to macrocyclic lactones in strongylids or in Parascaris equorum was observed. Twenty-nine strongylid species were found in horses from six horse farms. The number of species per horse ranged from 4-9 (5.8+/-1.5) to 10-20 (14.4+/-2.9) and depended on horse anthelmintic treatment strategies. From 4 to 13 strongylid species predominated (prevalence>66.7%) in the strongylid community. Eleven cyathostomin species (Cylicocyclus nassatus, C. ashworthi, C. leptostomum, Cyathostomum catinatum, C. pateratum, Cylicostephanus calicatus, C. longibursatus, C. goldi, C. minutus, Coronocyclus coronatus and C. labiatus) were found to be resistant to benzimidazoles at the Dubrovsky horse farm. Ten of these were the dominant species in the strongylid community; only C. labiatus was a rare species (prevalence 29.4%). Species richness and species diversity were significantly higher in horses from farms without treatment or with occasional treatments than from farms with regular treatments. The shape of the prevalence frequency distribution of strongylid species from farms with regular treatments was bimodal ("core" and "satellite" mode). This distribution was multimodal at farms without treatment or with occasional anthelmintic treatments. The results of the current study indicated the possibility of the further spread of anthelmintic resistance on horse farms in Ukraine and the necessity of monitoring the development of resistance in horse parasitic nematodes.