BACKGROUND: While debate about optimal organization for hospital antibiotic stewardship programs is ongoing, limited information is available about the implementation of such programs in acute-care institutions. The ABS International project conducted a survey on the implementation and characteristics of hospital antibiotic management programs in several European countries. This paper summarizes the results for Belgium, where a federal program for developing multidisciplinary antibiotic management teams was started in 2002. METHODS: The survey was conducted in April and May 2007. A questionnaire with 39 items to be scored from 0 (absent) to 5 (fully available) was sent to medical directors and chairs of drugs and therapeutics committees in all acute-care hospitals to measure five dimensions of hospital antibiotic management. The results were analyzed by calculating the mean scores for the various items and topics. MAIN FINDINGS: Of 120 questionnaires sent, 46 (38%) were completed and returned in time for analysis. The three regions of the country were well represented by the respondents. The mean country maturity score of 3.75 (range 2.15-4.90) indicated that a well developed antibiotic management system was in place in most hospitals. Over 90% of hospitals had key structural resources and tools available for effective stewardship programs. Performance items that scored high were those related to microbiological diagnostics and surveillance of bacterial resistance (4.41), surveillance of antibiotic consumption (4.16) and organization of antibiotic guidance and support by trained antibiotic management officers (3.81). Items that scored lower were professional development of personnel (3.43) and co-ordination with outside healthcare providers (2.95). Hospitals with several years of funding for their antibiotic officer showed higher scores for antibiotic management but not for diagnostics. CONCLUSIONS: Antibiotic stewardship programs are well developed in Belgian hospitals, particularly in those which first qualified for federal support. Extension of funding and technical assistance should help all hospitals to catch up with excellence standards, provided that adequate support is given to laboratory services and advanced training of professional specialists.