OBJECTIVES: To investigate the molecular epidemiology of ciprofloxacin-resistant CTX-M-15-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae epidemic clones (ECs) isolated from six nosocomial outbreaks and sporadic cases during 2005 in Hungary. METHODS: Two hundred and eighty-one extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing K. pneumoniae clinical isolates collected from 41 centres were submitted to the National ESBL Reference Laboratory for further investigations. Of the 281 strains, 75 isolates proved to be SHV producers, whereas 6 isolates were ciprofloxacin-susceptible CTX-M-type ESBL producers. One hundred and ninety-six ciprofloxacin-resistant CTX-M-type beta-lactamase-producing isolates collected from 35 centres were subjected to macrorestriction profile analysis. Furthermore, molecular typing was performed by PCR and sequencing of several antibiotic resistance genes, plasmid profile analysis, transfer of resistance determinants and multilocus sequence typing (MLST). RESULTS: PFGE revealed the existence of three genetic clusters defined as ECs, where 129 isolates belonged to the previously described Hungarian EC (HEC), 46 isolates to epidemic clone II (EC II) and 21 isolates to epidemic clone III (EC III), respectively. All isolates harboured plasmids ranging from 2.0 to 230 kb. PstI digestion of plasmid DNA from transconjugants/transformants revealed diverse restriction patterns from distinct ECs. Sequence analysis of beta-lactamase genes from 19 selected isolates detected bla(CTX-M-15) and bla(OXA-1) in strains from all three ECs and bla(TEM-1) in EC III isolates located on large plasmids. ISEcpI associated with CTX-M-15 was detected only on a 50 kb non-conjugative plasmid from EC III. MLST identified three allelic profiles: ST 15 (HEC), ST 11 (EC III) and the novel ST 147 (EC II), which correspond to the PFGE clusters, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: In 2005, 97% of all CTX-M-producing K. pneumoniae isolates detected across Hungary were highly ciprofloxacin-resistant CTX-M-15 producers and represented just three stable genetic clones.