OBJECTIVES: A multidisciplinary group (for the study and prevention of infections in children, GEPIE) conducted a local public health campaign to improve antibiotic prescribing in pediatric outpatient care in the Alpes-Maritimes district. This campaign included peer-conducted academic-detailing (educational outreach) visits in 2000 and 2003. Practitioners often report during both focus groups and the GEPIE visits that they prescribe antibiotics because of a fear of subsequent complications. This study therefore sought to explore the trends in invasive diseases related to bacterial respiratory pathogens. METHODS: A retrospective survey examined the incidence in the district of invasive infections due to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Neisseria meningitidis from 1998 through 2003 among children aged 1 month to 15 years. All local laboratories were asked for all reports of blood cultures (as well as spinal, synovial, pericardiac, peritoneal, and pleural fluid cultures) positive for these bacteria in the study population over the study period. Resistance and serotype data were recorded. RESULTS: Over the 6-year study period, there were 113 cases of invasive infections: 64% due to S. pneumoniae, 26% to N. meningitidis, 6% to H. influenzae, and 4% to S. pyogenes. There was no statistically significant difference in the annual average incidence rate before and during the campaign. The overall incidence rate was 11.2 cases per 100,000; meningitis accounted for 4.2, and invasive pneumococcal diseases 7.2 (42.7 per 100,000 children younger than 2 years). Pneumococcal resistance rates to penicillin and erythromycin did not change significantly. DISCUSSION: Two local cross-sectional studies at daycare centers in 1999 and 2002 showed a 9% reduction in the proportion of children who received antibiotics. The stability of invasive infection in children and of bacterial resistance during the campaign is reassuring. The campaign's risk/benefit ratio appears positive. CONCLUSION: These results encourage continuing promotion of rational antibiotic prescribing and ought to allay practitioners' fears about the consequences of prescribing antibiotics less often.