Malaria was a nationwide problem in Brazil in the 1940's. However during the late fifties a national and successful campaign gained strength in the country decreasing malaria to its lowest level by 1960, when only 36,9 thousand cases were registered. Although the Malaria Eradication Program of the Ministry of Health in Brazil succeeded by the late 60's in freeing the majority of the country from malaria transmission, it was unable to contain the rapid spread of the disease in the Amazon Basin. In the 1970's the Amazon region witnessed a huge transformation. Colonization programs sponsored by the government, mining exploration, massive migration and the construction of roads and dams brought a new reality for which the area was not prepared. The last data available show that in 2007, the Amazon registered around 450 thousand cases, 99.9% of the national cases. P. vivax has been reported as representing around 80% of all malaria cases. P. vivax is thought to cause little mortality but like P. falciparum, P. vivax accounts for vast amounts of morbidity and for huge burdens on the prosperity of endemic communities. However, in the last few years a pattern of unusual clinical complications with fatal cases associated with it have been reported in Brazil and is a matter of tremendous concern in the Brazilian community of malariologists. In addition, the emergence of P. vivax strains resistant to chloroquine and primaquine in some reports needs to be further investigated. In contrast, asymptomatic infections by P. falciparum and P. vivax were detected in epidemiological studies in the states of Rondonia and Amazonas. Seropidemiological studies investigating the type of immune responses elicited in naturally exposed populations to several malaria vaccine candidates in Brazilian populations have also been providing important information on whether immune responses specific to those antigens are generated in natural infections and their immunogenic potential as vaccine candidates. In fact ultimate test of a malaria vaccine will be determined in field trials under natural conditions of parasite exposure.