AIM: To test the theory that creating a reservoir of unselected worms by leaving a proportion of lambs in a flock untreated with anthelmintic, i.e. in refugia, will slow the development of anthelmintic resistance in nematode parasite populations. METHODS: Newly weaned Romney lambs (n=180) were infected with two nematode parasite species, Teladorsagia (= Ostertagia) circumcincta and Trichostrongylus colubriformis. For each species, the challenge doses contained a mixture of infective larvae from benzimidazole-resistant and -susceptible isolates calculated to yield, from the combined population, a 95% reduction in faecal nematode egg counts (FEC) following treatment with albendazole. Once the infections were patent, the lambs were divided into nine groups of 20 animals, and each group was allocated to one of three treatments. In Treatments 1, 2 and 3, 100%, 90% and 80% of animals were treated with an anthelmintic, respectively. For treatments 2 and 3, the heaviest animals remained untreated. Following treatment, each group was moved to its own previously prepared low-contamination pasture. Lambs grazed this pasture for 7 weeks before again being treated and moved to new low-contamination pastures (Shift 1 and Shift 2). The parasite populations on pasture resulting from the different treatments were subsequently sampled using tracer lambs, and worm eggs derived from these were used in both egg-hatch assays (EHA) and larval development assays (LDA), to measure albendazole-resistance status. RESULTS: Treating all animals each time the groups were moved to new low-contamination pastures resulted in higher levels of albendazole resistance (p<0.05), measured using EHA and LDA, in subsequent parasite generations than when either 10 or 20% of animals were left untreated. However, higher FEC in the tracer lambs grazed on pastures in Treatments 2 and 3, compared with Treatment 1, indicated an increased level of pasture contamination as a result of leaving some animals untreated. CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that creating a reservoir of unselected parasites slows the development of anthelmintic resistance, and emphasises the risk of treating all animals prior to a shift on to low-contamination pasture. However, higher levels of pasture contamination, resulting from untreated animals, indicate the difficulty in managing both worm control and resistance.