OBJECTIVE: To investigate the risk factors of insulin resistance (IR) and the role of IR and metabolic syndrome in the pathogenesis of chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN). METHODS: One hundred and twenty-seven kidney transplant recipients with normal renal function and no proteinuria at the 6th month after transplantation, and without the experience of acute rejection, calcinurine intoxication and severe infection, were involved in the study. Their primary disease of ESRF was chronic glomerulonephritis but not diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Half year and one year after transplantation, blood and urine biochemical determinations and physical examination were performed in the recipients, and HOMA calculated. 200 ordinary community residents were randomized selected as controls. RESULT: The incidence of MS in the recipients was significantly higher than controls. The incidences of obesity and overweight between recipients and controls were no significant difference. While the insulin resistance level and urine albumin level, and the incidence of MS and microalbuminuria (MAU) were significantly higher in recipients with obesity or overweight than that in recipients without obesity or overweight. The insulin resistance level in tacrolimus-treated recipients was markedly higher than CsA-treated recipients, and there was a positive correlation between the blood concentration of tacrolimus and insulin resistance level. MAU positive recipients had higher insulin resistance levels than the recipients without MAU. The recipients with metabolic syndrome had higher insulin resistance levels compared to recipients without metabolic syndrome, and higher insulin resistance levels existed in recipients with hypertriglyceridemia or hypercholesterolemia, hypertension. CONCLUSION: It is shown in the study that obesity or overweight, tacrolimus (especially when its blood concentration was high) were risk factors resulting in insulin resistance in kidney transplant recipients. It is suggested in the study that insulin resistance often accompanied with hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia and hypertension in kidney transplant recipients might be involved in the pathogenesis of the pathogenesis of CAN.