OBJECTIVES: Prospective cross sectional study was undertaken to assess the bacterial profile and antimicrobial resistance pattern of catheterized urinary tract infection in comparison with non-catheterized UTI in Jimma University Teaching Hospital, Southwest, Ethiopia. METHODS: One hundred and twenty patients, 30 catheterized (age range 20-78 years, male to female ratio 0.36:1) and 90 non-catheterized patients (age range 7-60 years, male to female ratio 2:1) with symptoms and signs of UTI were investigated for significant bacteriuria from January to March 2005. RESULTS: Significant bacteruria was observed in 13/30 (43.3%) and 20/90 (22.2%) of catheterized and non-catheterized patients, respectively (p<0.05). Klebsiella spp. (33.3%) and E. coli (27.7%) were the most common bacteria pathogens isolated in both groups and followed by Enterobacter spp. (6%). Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp. and coagulase negative Staphylococci were isolated only from catheterized patients. Gram-negative bacteria isolated in both groups showed a high level of resistance (88-100%) to ampicillin, amoxicillin carbencillin and cephalexin. and intermediate level of resistance (48-68%) to amoxicillin-clauvlanic acid, gentamicin and trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole. Low level of resistance (16-24%) observed to amikacin, ciprofloxacin, nalidxic acid and nitrofurantoin. Similar pattern of resistance was observed in all the gram-positive isolates including for methicillin, oxacillin and vancomycin (100%). On the other hand, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and polymixin B were found effective against all gram-positive bacteria isolated from both groups. CONCLUSION: The present study revealed that UTIs in both catheterized and non-catheterized patients was shown very high resistance pattern to most of antibiotics in use mainly at Jimma University Teaching Hospital, southwest Ethiopia. This calls for concerted efforts at all levels including regulatory bodies and the public healthcare providers as well as private ones. Creating awareness of the community will also have a significant role to curb this problem.