OBJECTIVE: To summarize the published clinical data on posaconazole, critically review the New Drug Application data submitted to the Food and Drug Administration, and provide information critical for evaluation and formulary positioning. DATA SOURCES: Reported investigations were identified from MEDLINE (1966-June 30, 2008), bibliographies of manuscripts, www.clinicaltrials.gov, and www.fda.gov. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: English-language articles were selected. All available in vitro, animal, clinical, and human studies describing the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, safety, and adverse events of posaconazole were reviewed. DATA SYNTHESIS: Posaconazole is an oral broad-spectrum triazole with activity against many yeasts and molds. Resistance to posaconazole has been reported, but has been rare to date. Posaconazole, in doses of 200 mg 3 times daily, reduced breakthrough invasive fungal infections (OR 0.30; 95% CI 0.12 to 0.71) and aspergillosis incidence (OR 0.31; 95% CI 0.13 to 0.75) in patients receiving hematopoietic stem-cell transplants compared with those receiving fluconazole. Similarly, the same regimen of posaconazole reduced invasive fungal infections (95% CI -9.7 to -2.5) and aspergillosis (CI not reported, p < 0.001) when compared with fluconazole and itraconazole in neutropenic patients. Posaconazole is noninferior to fluconazole for treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis (95% CI -6.6 to 5.0), but necessity for this indication remains unclear, as many other treatment options exist. Smaller investigations have analyzed use of posaconazole for patients requiring salvage or alternative treatment for zygomycosis, fusariosis, cryptococcal meningitis, coccidioidomycosis, and histoplasmosis. Studies are needed to clarify efficacy for such expanded use, and therapeutic drug monitoring may improve outcomes. The most common adverse effects associated with the use of posaconazole include headache, fever, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. CONCLUSIONS: Posaconazole appears to be a valuable and promising addition to the antifungal armamentarium for prophylaxis and treatment of various fungal processes. At this time, posaconazole should probably be reserved for prophylaxis in patients at high risk for invasive fungal infection, as salvage therapy in refractory or resistant infections, or for patients with intolerance to other therapies.