Despite the significant successes in the area of anti-HBV agents, resistance and cross-resistance against available therapeutics are the major hurdles in drug discovery. The present investigation is to understand the molecular basis of drug resistance conferred by the B and C domain mutations of HBV-polymerase on the binding affinity of five anti-HBV agents [lamivudine (3TC, 1), adefovir (ADV, 2), entecavir (ETV, 3), telbivudine (LdT, 4) and clevudine (l-FMAU, 5)]. In this regard, homology modeled structure of HBV-polymerase was used for minimization, conformational search and induced fit docking followed by binding energy calculation on wild-type as well as on mutant HBV-polymerases (L180M, M204V, M204I, L180M+M204V, L180M-M204I). Our studies suggest a significant correlation between the fold resistances and the binding affinity of anti-HBV nucleosides. The binding mode studies reveals that the domain C residue M204 is closely associated with sugar/pseudosugar ring positioning in the active site. The positioning of oxathiolane ring of 3TC (1) is plausible due the induced fit orientation of the M204 residue in wild-type, and further mutation of M204 to V204 or I204 reduces the final binding affinity which leads to the drug resistance. The domain B residue L180 is not directly close ( approximately 6A) to the nucleoside/nucleoside analogs, but indirectly associated with other active-site hydrophobic residues such as A87, F88, P177 and M204. These five hydrophobic residues can directly affect on the incoming nucleoside analogs in terms of its association and interaction that can alter the final binding affinity. There was no sugar ring shifting observed in the case of adefovir (2) and entecavir (3), and the position of sugar ring of 2 and 3 is found similar to the sugar position of natural substrate dATP and dGTP, respectively. The exocyclic double bond of entecavir (3) occupied in the backside hydrophobic pocket (made by residues A87, F88, P177, L180 and M204), which enhances the overall binding affinity. The active site binding of LdT (4) and l-FMAU (5) showed backward shifting along with upward movement without enforcing M204 residue and this significant different binding mode makes these molecules as polymerase inhibitors, without being incorporated into the growing HBV-DNA chain. Structural results conferred by these l- and d-nucleosides, explored the molecular basis of drug resistance which can be utilized for future anti-HBV drug discovery.