OBJECTIVE. To determine the prevalence of Staphylococcus aureus strains among hospitalized patients at the beginning of their hospitalization and during their treatment and the resistance of strains to antibiotics, and to evaluate epidemiologic characteristics of these strains. PATIENTS AND METHODS. Sixty-one patients treated at the Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery were examined. Identification of Staphylococcus aureus strains was performed using plasmacoagulase and DNase tests. The resistance of Staphylococcus aureus to antibiotics, beta-lactamase production, phagotypes, and phagogroups were determined. The isolated Staphylococcus aureus strains were tested for resistance to methicillin by performing disc diffusion method using commercial discs (Oxoid) (methicillin 5 microg per disk and oxacillin 1 microg per disk). RESULTS. A total of 297 Staphylococcus aureus strains were isolated. On the first day of hospitalization, the prevalence rate of Staphylococcus aureus strains among patients was 67.3%, and it statistically significantly increased to 91.8% on days 7-10 of hospitalization (P<0.05). During hospitalization, patients were colonized with Staphylococcus aureus strains resistant to cephalothin (17.6% of patients, P<0.05), cefazolin (14.6%, P<0.05), tetracycline (15.0%, P<0.05), gentamicin (37.7%, P<0.001), doxycycline (30.7%, P<0.001), and tobramycin (10.6%, P>0.05). Three patients (4.9%) were colonized with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strains, belonging to phage group II phage type 3A and phage group III phage types 83A and 77; 22.6-25.5% of Staphylococcus aureus strains were nontypable. During hospitalization, the prevalence rate of phage group II Staphylococcus aureus strains decreased from 39.6% to 5.7% (P<0.05) and the prevalence rate of phage group III Staphylococcus aureus strains increased to 29.5% (P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS. Although our understanding of Staphylococcus aureus is increasing, well-designed community-based studies with adequate risk factor analysis are required to elucidate further the epidemiology of Staphylococcus aureus and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Surveillance of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus provides relevant information on the extent of the methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus epidemic, identifies priorities for infection control and the need for adjustments in antimicrobial drug policy, and guides intervention programs.