Mapping the number and distribution of Salmonella on poultry carcasses will help guide better design of processing procedures to reduce or eliminate this human pathogen from poultry. A selective plating media with multiple antibiotics (xylose-lysine agar medium [XL] containing N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N'-(2-ethanesulfonic acid) and the antibiotics chloramphenicol, ampicillin, tetracycline, and streptomycin [XLH-CATS]) and a multiple-antibiotic-resistant strain (ATCC 700408) of Salmonella Typhimurium definitive phage type 104 (DT104) were used to develop an enumeration method for mapping the number and distribution of Salmonella Typhimurium DT104 on the carcasses of young chickens in the Cornish game hen class. The enumeration method was based on the concept that the time to detection by drop plating on XLH-CATS during incubation of whole chicken parts in buffered peptone water would be inversely related to the initial log number (N0) of Salmonella Typhimurium DT104 on the chicken part. The sampling plan for mapping involved dividing the chicken into 12 parts, which ranged in average size from 36 to 80 g. To develop the enumeration method, whole parts were spot inoculated with 0 to 6 log Salmonella Typhimurium DT104, incubated in 300 ml of buffered peptone water, and detected on XLH-CATS by drop plating. An inverse relationship between detection time on XLH-CATS and N0 was found (r = -0.984). The standard curve was similar for the individual chicken parts and therefore, a single standard curve for all 12 chicken parts was developed. The final standard curve, which contained a 95% prediction interval for providing stochastic results for N0, had high goodness of fit (r2 = 0.968) and was N0 (log) = 7.78 +/- 0.61 - (0.995 x detention time). Ninety-five percent of N0 were within +/- 0.61 log of the standard curve. The enumeration method and sampling plan will be used in future studies to map changes in the number and distribution of Salmonella on carcasses of young chickens fed the DT104 strain used in standard curve development and subjected to different processing procedures.