OBJECTIVE: To determine the bacterial aetiology of sepsis occurring following surgery of odontogenic tumours and assess the effect of prompt and proper antibiotic usage. DESIGN: A prospective study. SETTING: A tertiary referral centre in Lagos, Nigeria. SUBJECTS: Twelve patients with odontogenic tumours that developed sepsis postoperatively. Eight of the patients were referred from private hospitals, the remaining were in-patients who sought for alternative medical attention following interruption of health care services at the referral centre. INTERVENTION: Adequate review of patient's medical history, bacteriological investigations and antibiotic therapy. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Bacteriological and clinical cure following antibiotic therapy based on susceptibility test results. RESULTS: Two categories of patients were identified; those who completed the course of antibiotics prescribed post-surgery and patients who failed to conform to antibiotic prescription. Sepsis developed in the non-compliance group much earlier than in the group that complied (p<0.001). Infections were polybacterial with aerobes accounting for 77.4% (alpha-haemolytic streptococci 29.0%, Streptococcus pyogenes 16.1%, Staphylococcus aureus 16.1%, diphtheroids 9.7%, Klebsiella pneumoniae 6.5%) and anaerobes 22.6% (Porphyromonas gingivalis 9.7%, Peptostreptococcus spp. 6.5%, Prevotella melaninogenica 3.2%, Clostridium perfringens 3.2%). Mixed aerobic and anaerobic aetiology occurred more in osteosarcoma and fibrosarcoma. Clostridium perfringens was isolated from a case of osteosarcoma with necrotic tissues. The anaerobic bacteria were 100% sensitive to metronidazole, ciprofloxacin and augmentin, 65-85% sensitivity to ampicloxacillin, amoxicillin and erythromycin. Over 92% of the streptococci were sensitive to the beta-Lactams contrast low susceptibility with S. aureus and K. pneumoniae. CONCLUSION: Interruption of healthcare service was the sole factor identified in the development of sepsis as the patients could not be monitored to ensure compliance to prescription.