Infective endocarditis has variable clinical presentations and may present with rheumatologic manifestations. Infective endocarditis due to high level aminoglycoside resistant enterococci represents a severe therapeutic challenge as none of the currently recommended treatment regimens are bactericidal against these isolates. In this report, a case of infective endocarditis with double aetiology, high level aminoglycoside resistant Enterococcus faecalis together with methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci (MR-CNS), presenting with leukocytoclastic vasculitis and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, has been presented. A 48-years-old woman was admitted to our hospital with malaise and non-pruritic purpural rush on her lower extremities. On admission she had no fever or leukocytosis. Skin biopsy showed leukocytoclastic vasculitis and steroid therapy was started. On 12th day of admission rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis was diagnosed and she received plasmapheresis and haemodialysis support. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated 1 x 1.5 cm vegetation on the mitral valve. An initial diagnosis of infective endocarditis was made and empirical treatment with vancomycin and gentamicin was started. All blood cultures yielded high level aminoglycoside resistant E. faecalis and additionally two of them yielded MR-CNS. Vancomycin was administered in combination with high dose ampicillin and repeated blood cultures taken after administration of ampicillin, revealed no growth. The patient remained afebrile, renal functions improved and a repeat TTE done on 20th day of ampicillin therapy showed waning of the vegetation. On 42nd day of treatment repeat TTE showed new vegetation on the mitral valve and severe valve insufficiency, so the patient was scheduled for mitral valve replacement. She was treated for 12 weeks with vancomycin and ampicillin and recovered successfully. In conclusion; infective endocarditis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of leukocytoclastic vasculitis and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. Physicians should document their treatment outcomes and experience with high level aminoglycoside resistant enterococcal infective endocarditis, which is a therapeutic challenge, so that the best therapeutic options can be identified.