We conducted 3 nationwide surveillance studies between 2001 and 2005 at 39 participating institutions throughout Japan according to the special survey plan to investigate susceptibility to ciprofloxacin (CPFX) and various parenteral antimicrobials using clinical isolates from patients with severe infection during the reexamination period of parenteral CPFX. Results of the first special survey (2001) were already reported in this journal. The current third special survey (2005) was conducted at 34 participating institutions throughout Japan to determine susceptibility to CPFX and 22 various parenteral antimicrobials with the use of the microdilution method with respect to 1696 strains isolated and identified from various clinical specimens between January and June 2005. The results of CPFX in this survey were compared with those in the first and second special surveys. The minimum inhibitory concentration of CPFX at which 90% of isolates were susceptible (MIC90) ranged from < or =0.063 to 2 microg/mL for methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Moraxella catarrhalis, Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella spp., Citrobacter freundii, Enterobacter spp., Proteus spp., Serratia marcescens, and Acinetobacter baumannii, revealing no marked change from results of the first and second surveys. However, the CPFX-susceptibility rate of Escherichia coli decreased in the second and third surveys compared to that in the first survey. For Morganella morganii and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the MIC90 of CPFX tended to increase with time. The CPFX-susceptibility rates calculated from the pneumonia breakpoint were 85.2% for P. aeruginosa and 67.9% for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. With the exception of these 2 species, major causative organisms of respiratory tract infection had susceptibility rates as high as 90% or more for CPFX, which were similar to results of the first and second special surveys. These susceptibility rates for CPFX were similar to the rates for cefozopran and imipenem. These values generally indicated favorable CPFX susceptibility testing results of major bacteria and the potent antimicrobial activity of CPFX particularly against Gram-negative bacteria. Further surveillance is required regarding the trend in susceptibility of E. coli, M. morganii, and P. aeruginosa, which tended to become less susceptible with time.