The majority of patients with chronic hepatitis C fail to respond to antiviral therapy. The genetic basis of this resistance is unknown. The quasispecies nature of HCV may have an important implication concerning viral persistence and response to therapy. The HCV nonstructural 5A (NS5A) protein has been controversially implicated in the inherent resistance of HCV to interferon (IFN) antiviral therapy. To evaluate whether the NS5A quasispecies pre-treatment composition of HCV 1a/1b is related to responsiveness to combined pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) and Ribavirin therapy, detailed analyses of the complete NS5A were performed. Fifteen full-length NS5A clones were sequenced from 11 pre-treatment samples of patients infected with genotype 1 HCV (3 virological sustained responders, 4 non-responders, and 4 end-of-treatment responders). Our study could not show a significant correlation between the mean number of mutations in HCV NS5A before treatment and treatment outcome, and the phylogenetic construction of complete NS5A sequences obtained from all patients failed to show any clustering associated with a specific response pattern. No single amino acid position was associated with different responses to therapy in any of the NS5A regions analyzed, and mutations were clustered downstream the ISDR, primarily in the V3 region. We observed that the CRS and NLS regions of the NS5A protein were conflicting for some variables analyzed, although no significant differences were found. If these two regions can have antagonistic functions, it seems viable that they present different mutation profiles when compared with treatment response. The patient sample that presented the lowest genetic distance values also presented the smallest number of variants, and the most heterogeneous pattern was seen in the end-of-treatment patients. These results suggest that a detailed molecular analysis of the NS5A region on a larger sample size may be necessary for understanding its role in the therapy outcome of HCV 1a/1b infection.