The in vitro activity of tinidazole against anaerobic periodontal pathogens (25 Prevotella buccae, 18 Prevotella denticola, 10 Prevotella intermedia, 6 Prevotella melaninogenica, 5 Prevotella oralis, 10 Fusobacterium nucleatum and 8 Veillonella spp.) was determined by agar dilution. MIC(90) values (minimum inhibitory concentration for 90% of the organisms) were 8 microg/mL for Veillonella spp., 4 microg/mL for P. intermedia, 2 microg/mL for P. buccae, 1 microg/mL for Fusobacterium spp. and 0.5 microg/mL for other Prevotella spp. Cidal activity was studied by killing curves with tinidazole and amoxicillin (alone and in combination) at concentrations similar to those achieved in crevicular fluid (41.2 microg/mL tinidazole and 14.05 microg/mL amoxicillin) against an inoculum of ca. 10(7)colony-forming units/mL of four bacterial groups, each one composed of four different strains of the following periodontal isolates: Prevotella spp., Fusobacterium spp. and Veillonella spp. (anaerobes) and one amoxicillin-susceptible Streptococcus spp. (facultative) in a proportion of 1:1:1:1. When only beta-lactamase-negative Prevotella or Fusobacterium strains were tested, significantly higher reductions were found with amoxicillin (>4 log reduction at 48 h) versus controls. The presence of beta-lactamase-positive Prevotella spp. or F. nucleatum strains rendered amoxicillin inactive (no reductions at 48 h), with no differences from controls. Amoxicillin+tinidazole produced >3 log reduction at 24h and >4 log reduction at 48 h regardless of the presence or not of beta-lactamase-positive strains. The presence in crevicular fluid of beta-lactamases produced by beta-lactamase-positive periodontal pathogens may have ecological and therapeutic consequences since it may protect beta-lactamase-negative periodontal pathogens from amoxicillin treatment. In vitro, tinidazole offered high antianaerobic activity against beta-lactamase-positive and -negative periodontal pathogens, avoiding amoxicillin inactivation.