Lysozyme functions as a crucial biodefence effector against the infection of bacterial pathogens in innate immunity. The nucleotide sequence polymorphisms in promoter region of a nuclear goose type lysozyme gene from Zhikong scallop Chlamys farreri (designated as CFLysG) were investigated to explore their association with susceptibility/resistance to Listonella anguillarum infection. Eight sites of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and two sites of insert-deletion (ins-del) polymorphisms were identified in the promoter region of CFLysG. Two of them, -753 TATCTCGATCAGG ins-del polymorphism and -391 A-G SNP were selected to analyze their distribution in the susceptible and resistant stocks, which were identified according to the survival time after L. anguillarum challenge. Using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP), two genotypes were found at each site, which were ins/del and ins/ins at locus -753, and A/A and A/G at locus -391, respectively. The -753 ins/del genotype was more prevalent in the resistant stock than that in the susceptible stock, 30% vs 16.67% in frequency, but there was no significant difference in the frequency distribution between these two stocks (P=0.15). In contrast, the frequency of -391A/G genotype in the resistant stock was significantly higher (30%) than that in the susceptible stock (7.14%) (P=0.007), indicating a significant association with the resistance of Zhikong scallop to L. anguillarum. To confirm the presumption, another independent challenge experiment was performed, in which the cumulative mortality of scallops with -391 A/A genotype (96.8%) was significantly higher than those with -391 A/G genotype (64.5%) (P=0.001), which further validate the association between -391 A/G genotype and the resistance of Zhikong scallop to L. anguillarum. These results suggested that the -391 A/G could be a potential marker applied in future selection of Zhikong scallop with enhanced resistance to L. anguillarum.