Anthelmintics are currently the most common method of worm control. The emergence of worms with multiple-drug resistance and issues of residues in the food chain make alternative parasite control measures a priority. To develop improved and sustainable methods for controlling Haemonchus contortus such as genetic selection of resistant sheep, a better understanding of the host-parasite relationship is required. A trial was undertaken using sheep surgically implanted with abomasal fistulas to enable sequential biopsy of the abomasal mucosa during trickle infection with two strains of H. contortus. These were ivermectin-resistant CAVR and ivermectin-sensitive McMaster. From a gross parasitology perspective, this approach enabled the effect of developing immunity to be observed on both the establishment and maturation of two CAVR doses within and between groups. Since the only difference in parasite treatment between the groups was the staggering of the two CAVR doses, microarray results from biopsies taken on the same day in different groups were combined and compared between different biopsy dates to observe differential gene transcription over time. Differential gene transcription was detected by comparing transcription in our array data between different biopsy dates using a low P value screen (P<0.01) and by compiling a list of 82 immunoparasitology-related genes and examining transcription in this list with a higher P value screen (P<0.05). Our microarray data were validated in silico by comparison with intelectin 2, trefoil factor 3, calcium activated chloride channel and mucin 5 from other gene transcription studies and with phenotypic data such as the response by gammadelta T cells and immunoglobulins to H. contortus. The first four genes are involved in non-specific responses to infection and mucosal healing. These were upregulated at the early time points and intelectin 2 remained prominent throughout the trial. As the trial progressed, immunoglobulin genes became strongly upregulated. These included IgCgamma IgG2a heavy chain constant region, IGHE immunoglobulin heavy constant epsilon and IGHM immunoglobulin heavy constant mu.