BACKGROUND: Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been speculated as possible inducers of structural or functional changes that lead to a hyperpermeable state in patients on long-term peritoneal dialysis. This study aimed to compare localization of tight junction-associated proteins (TJPs), which relate to solute permeability characteristics, between human peritoneal mesothelial cell (HPMC) monolayers and human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) monolayers under oxidative stress. METHODS: HPMCs and HUVECs were cultured on a polymer mesh until transepithelial electrical resistance reached a plateau. Solute permeation tests were conducted using FITC-labeled dextrans. Localization of TJPs was observed under a confocal laser scanning microscope. These experiments were carried out with/without 0.1 mmol/L H(2)O(2). In addition, ROS production as well as the amounts of intracellular reductive glutathione (GSH) and oxidative glutathione were measured. RESULTS: When the monolayers were exposed to 0.1 mmol/L H(2)O(2)/medium for 2 hours, the HPMC monolayer revealed a significant reduction in transepithelial electrical resistance (from 32.5 +/- 3.4 to 17.4 +/- 4.9 Omega.cm(2)) with delocalization of TJPs, particularly occludins. The HUVEC monolayer remained stable and exhibited an unremarkable change in TJP organization. Compared to the HUVEC monolayer, the HPMC monolayer exhibited two- to threefold higher 2',7'-dichlorofluorescein intensities that increased in a dose-dependent manner. HUVECs contained approximately 2.5-times more GSH than HPMCs. This supported the lesser production of ROS when exposed to 0.1 mmol/L H(2)O(2) for 24 hours. HUVECs used 8.03 nmol/mg GSH protein to maintain TJP localization, while only 3.75 nmol/mg GSH protein was available for the HPMCs. CONCLUSION: The HUVEC monolayer, which was less permeable to middle-to-high molecular weight solutes, was more tolerant against ROS stress than the HPMC monolayer. Availability of intracellular GSH is an important issue in maintaining the integrity of the mesothelium.