The rapid escalation of anthelmintic resistance in parasites suggests the adoption of different strategies for parasite control in small ruminants instead of relying only on the use of chemicals. The integrated system of parasite control (SICOPA) program uses the FAMACHA method, which is used to separately identify sheep that are resistant/resilient or susceptible to Haemonchus contortus, or together with other management practices, such as pasture rotation or the monitoring of drug efficacy. The objective of this work was to compare two methods of parasite control in ewes. A flock of ewes (n=90) of Ile de France and Texel breeds was monitored from August 2001 to July 2003 under suppressive treatment (45-day treatment interval) and from August 2003 to July 2006 under the partial selective regimen based on FAMACHA evaluations. Fecal samples were collected for fecal egg counts (EPG) and larval identification to monitor infection during the 5-year period. After the partial selective evaluations, an average of 19% of the animals was treated each year between 2003 and 2006. The reproductive indexes of parturition (89%), birth rate (119%), lamb weight (4.1 kg) and lamb mortality (5.2%) were similar under the partial selective regimen and the previous suppressive treatment period. H. contortus was the most prevalent species, and EPG values were not statistically different across periods or among treatment regimes. The results demonstrate that the FAMACHA method allowed a large number of naturally infected ewes to be raised with reduced anthelmintic treatment without a negative impact on their reproductive indexes. It is indicated, though, that this method be applied together with other available strategies. Culling was based on clinical signs and ranged from 5.5 to 20% per year. The results suggest that an important host-specific effect may have regulated the rate of infection, expressing the resistant/resilient characteristic within the flock with an important economical benefit.