INTRODUCTION: Antibacterial activity of ophthalmic fourth-generation fluoroquinolones has traditionally been evaluated by comparing only their active ingredients, gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin. However, ophthalmic formulations of fourth-generation fluoroquinolones differ in terms of the inclusion of preservatives. While gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.3% (Zymar; Allergan, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) contains 0.005% benzalkonium chloride (BAK), moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% (Vigamox; Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX, USA) is preservative-free. Recent studies have demonstrated that the presence of BAK dramatically affects the antibacterial activity of the ophthalmic formulation of gatifloxacin. This study was designed to compare the kill rates of ophthalmic solutions of fourth-generation fluoroquinolones against isolates of common ocular bacterial pathogens. METHODS: Approximately 5.6 log(10) colony-forming units (CFU)/mL of Haemophilus influenzae (n=1), Streptococcus pneumoniae (n=1), Staphylococcus aureus (n=2), methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (n=4), methicillinresistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE) (n=4), and fluoroquinolone-resistant S. epidermidis (n=1) were incubated with ophthalmic solutions of either gatifloxacin or moxifloxacin. Viable bacteria were quantified at specific time points up to 60 minutes. RESULTS: Gatifloxacin 0.3% completely eradicated H. influenzae and Strep. pneumoniae in 5 minutes, one of two S. aureus isolates in 15 minutes, and the other S. aureus isolate in 60 minutes. Gatifloxacin 0.3% completely killed all MRSA, MRSE, and fluoroquinolone-resistant S. epidermidis isolates in 15 minutes. Moxifloxacin 0.5% completely eradicated Strep. pneumoniae and one of four MRSA isolates in 60 minutes. All other isolates incubated with moxifloxacin 0.5% retained viable bacteria ranging from 1.8 to 4.4 log(10) CFU/mL. CONCLUSIONS: The ophthalmic solution of gatifloxacin 0.3% eradicated bacteria that frequently cause postoperative ocular infections substantially faster than did the ophthalmic solution of moxifloxacin 0.5%.