BACKGROUND: There is controversy about the preferred initial antibiotic therapy for peritoneal dialysis (PD)-related peritonitis. Quinolones have been used extensively in this setting, yet their long-term effectiveness is unknown. AIM: To analyze the results of a protocol of treatment of PD-related peritonitis with ciprofloxacin, maintained over two decades. METHOD: We analyzed the clinical outcome of 682 episodes of bacterial peritonitis treated with intraperitoneal ciprofloxacin monotherapy, and the time course of bacterial susceptibility to this antimicrobial, in a historical cohort of 641 PD patients (1988-2007). Main outcome variables included changes to initial therapy and rates of hospital admission, catheter removal, relapse, reinfection, PD dropout, and mortality. For comparisons we divided the study period into phases A (1988-1994), B (1995-2000), and C (2001-2007). RESULTS: The incidence of Staphylococcus aureus peritonitis decreased, while the incidences of polymicrobial and negative-culture peritonitis increased after phase A. In vitro susceptibility to ciprofloxacin decreased significantly only among coagulase-negative staphylococci (87.0% susceptible strains in phase A vs 70.0% in B and 70.1% in C, p = 0.006). Overall success rates (catheter not removed and ongoing PD after the episode) remained stable, at over 85%. However, the proportion of patients treated solely with ciprofloxacin declined from 75.7% (A) to 47.3% (B) to 32.4% (C) (p < 0.0005) and admission rates increased from 12.7% to 16.8% to 24.9% respectively (p = 0.001). These changes affected all the etiologic groups except culture-negative peritonitis. In vitro resistance to ciprofloxacin was a marker of multiresistance and correlated strongly with clinical outcome of peritonitis. Among isolates susceptible to ciprofloxacin, changing initial therapy for any reason also predicted a poor outcome. CONCLUSIONS: Following satisfactory early results, the effectiveness of ciprofloxacin as monotherapy for PD-related peritonitis has declined markedly in the long term. This decline cannot be explained solely by a decrease of in vitro susceptibility to this antimicrobial, which was significant only among coagulase-negative staphylococci. Resistance to ciprofloxacin is a strong marker of in vitro multiresistance and poor clinical outcome of peritonitis.