Human interferon-beta (IFN-beta) is known to exhibit pleiotropic biological activities including antitumor effects. On the other hand, temozolomide (TMZ), an oral bioavailable alkylating agent with excellent tolerability, has demonstrated efficacy and has become a key therapeutic agent in patients with malignant gliomas; however, its survival benefit remains unsatisfactory. More recent studies have indicated that there might be favorable therapeutic interactions between IFN-beta and TMZ, although the therapeutic advantages of such a combination have not yet been fully explored. The main aim of the present study was to determine whether an antitumor effect could be potentiated by a combination of IFN-beta and TMZ. The antitumor effect of and cell sensitivity to IFN-beta and TMZ and the synergistic potential of IFN-beta and TMZ in combination were evaluated in six malignant glioma cell lines. Correlations among the MGMT methylation status, quantitative level of MGMT mRNA, MGMT protein expression and the antitumor effect of these agents were also evaluated, since one of the most prominent resistance mechanisms to TMZ involves the DNA repair protein MGMT. The cell growth inhibitory effects of IFN-beta and TMZ on all tumor cell lines were observed in a dose-dependent manner, and the human malignant glioma-derived cell lines differed in their sensitivity to TMZ. The MGMT status, including promoter hypermethylation, quantitative mRNA expression and protein expression, was strongly correlated with TMZ sensitivity. A synergistic cell growth inhibitory effect and down-regulated MGMT mRNA levels were significantly observed when a clinically achievable CNS dose of IFN-beta was combined with TMZ, as compared to treatment with IFN-beta or TMZ alone in TMZ-resistant T98G cells. Furthermore, significant amounts of endogenous IFN-beta protein were detected in TMZ-treated T98G cells by ELISA. These results suggest that the clinical therapeutic efficacy of TMZ might be improved by a combination with IFN-beta in malignant gliomas unmethylated at the MGMT gene. The data provide an experimental basis for future strategies in TMZ chemotherapy, although further studies are needed to determine the detailed role of combined IFN-beta and TMZ chemotherapy in increasing tumor sensitivity.