BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Long-term use of ureteral stents is prevented by biofilm-related infection and encrustation mandating stent changes every few months. Triclosan is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial in numerous consumer and medical products and has been incorporated into a ureteral stent. We sought to determine the clinical effects of the triclosan-eluting stent in patients who needed long-term ureteral stenting. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eight patients with long-term stents were enrolled prospectively. All received a control stent for 3 months along with preoperative and postoperative antibiotics. After 3 months, the control stent was removed, and a triclosan-eluting stent was placed for 3 months with no antibiotics administered. For both indwelling periods, urine cultures were obtained weekly and biweekly for the first and last 6 weeks, respectively, and antibiotics were prescribed when patients had both a positive urine culture and symptoms of urinary tract infection. On removal, stents were assessed for microorganisms and encrustation. RESULTS: Overall, similar microorganisms were isolated during each indwell period, although Staphylococcus and Enterococcus strains were isolated more frequently during control and triclosan stenting, respectively. Significantly fewer antibiotics were used during triclosan stenting, coinciding with a slightly higher number of positive urine cultures and significantly fewer symptomatic infections. No bacterial isolates developed antibiotic resistance during triclosan stent placement. CONCLUSIONS: Antibiotic use with control stents resulted in bacterial antibiotic resistance, which was not the case with the triclosan-eluting stents. Although triclosan-eluting stents did not show a clinical benefit in terms of urine and stent cultures or overall subject symptoms compared with controls, their use did result in decreased antibiotic usage and significantly fewer symptomatic infections. The triclosan-eluting stent alone is not sufficient to reduce device-associated infections in this difficult patient population.