BACKGROUND: Contamination of endoscopy equipment by Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) frequently occurs after endoscopic examination of H. pylori-infected patients. In the hospital, manual pre-cleaning and soaking in glutaraldehyde is an important process to disinfect endoscopes. However, this might not be sufficient to remove H. pylori completely, and some glutaraldehyde-resistant bacteria might survive and be passed to the next patient undergoing endoscopic examination through unidentified mechanisms. We identified an Imp/OstA protein associated with glutaraldehyde resistance in a clinical strain, NTUH-C1, from our previous study. To better understand and manage the problem of glutaraldehyde resistance, we further investigated its mechanism. RESULTS: The minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of glutaraldehyde andexpression of imp/ostA RNA in 11 clinical isolates from the National Taiwan University Hospital were determined. After glutaraldehyde treatment, RNA expression in the strains with the MICs of 4-10 microg/ml was higher than that in strains with the MICs of 1-3 microg/ml. We examined the full-genome expression of strain NTUH-S1 after glutaraldehyde treatment using a microarray and found that 40 genes were upregulated and 31 genes were downregulated. Among the upregulated genes, imp/ostA and msbA, two putative lipopolysaccharide biogenesis genes, were selected for further characterization. The sensitivity to glutaraldehyde or hydrophobic drugs increased in both of imp/ostA and msbA single mutants. The imp/ostA and msbA double mutant was also hypersensitive to these chemicals. The lipopolysaccharide contents decreased in individual imp/ostA and msbA mutants and dramatically reduced in the imp/ostA and msbA double mutant. Outer membrane permeability assay demonstrated that the imp/ostA and msbA double mutation resulted in the increase of outer membrane permeability. Ethidium bromide accumulation assay demonstrated that MsbA was involved in efflux of hydrophobic drugs. CONCLUSION: The expression levels of imp/ostA and msbA were correlated with glutaraldehyde resistance in clinical isolates after glutaraldehyde treatment. Imp/OstA and MsbA play a synergistic role in hydrophobic drugs resistance and lipopolysaccharide biogenesis in H. pylori.