OBJECTIVE: To explore the influence of non-gonococcal Neisseria on the diagnosis and treatment of male genitourinary infection. METHODS: The samples of urethral exudates, prostatic secretions or/and semen were collected from 8 cases of male patients with acute urethritis or chronic prostatitis, then inoculated into gonococcal agar medium, blood agar medium, Sabouraud agar medium and Mycoplasma agar medium, respectively. Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Mycoplasmae, fungi and other bacteria were isolated, Chlamydiae examined by Gemenez staining, and the gram-negative diplococci from the samples identified by oxidase test, biochemical examination and drug sensitivity test. The PCR products of the cryptic plasmid pJD1 gene of the isolated strains were amplified for the identification of Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Based on the results of drug sensitivity tests, intravenous or oral antibiotics were selected for treatment. RESULTS: Eight strains of gram-negative diplococci were isolated in this study, 3 identified as N. mucosa, 4 as N. cinerea and the other 1 as N. lactamica. The PCR identification test of the cryptic plasmid pJD1 gene showed the same positive results in all the strains as in N. gonorrhoeae. The non-gonococcal Neisseria isolated from the male genital tract secretions exhibited a multidrug resistance, especially to quinolones and fosfomycin. All the symptoms disappeared and no pathogens were detected in the patients after a 7-day treatment with Cephalosporins or/and Minocycline. CONCLUSION: Some Neisseria species normally parasitizing the upper respiratory tract can also cause male genitourinary infections, such as gonorrhea-like urethritis and chronic prostatitis. Neisseria gonorrhea could be clinically and etiologically misdiagnosed through such conventional methods as morphological examination, oxidase test and PCR identification test of cryptic plasmid and other nonspecific genes. Intravenous and/or oral antibiotic medication based on the results of drug sensitivity tests can cure acute urethritis and chronic prostatitis induced by non-gonococcal Neisseria in males. Drug resistance of non-gonococcal Neisseria directly affects the success of treatment.