OBJECTIVE: To illustrate the bacteriology and their susceptibility to antibiotics in patients with biliary tract diseases and provide information for antibiotic choices. METHODS: The bile specimens were cultured and pathogens' susceptibility to antibiotics was obtained intraoperatively from 195 patients undergoing operations on biliary tract and 24 healthy liver donors from June 2007 to March 2008. RESULTS: Among 195 bile specimens collected from the patients intraoperatively, 44 ones were found bacterial growth by culture (22.6%), in which 11 ones were mixed infections (25.0%). Fifty-five bacterial strains belonging to 16 species were identified from these bile specimens. They included 34 Gram negative strains (61.8%), 19 Gram positive strains (34.6%) and 2 fungal strains (3.6%). The commonest pathogens were Escherichia coli (27.3%), Enterobacter cloacae (12.7%), Enterococcus faecalis (12.7%) and Enterococcus faecium (10.9%). Among 24 bile specimens collected from the healthy liver donors, one was found Escherichia coli growth by culture (4.2%). The results of susceptibility test showed that the resistant rates of Gram negative strains to Meropenem was 2.8%, followed by Imipenem (5.6%), Sulperazone (22.8%) and Amikacin (28.7%). In this study Gram negative strains were highly resistant to Penicillins, Quinolones, some third generation Cephalosporins and so on (>50.0%). None of Gram positive strains were resistant to Vancomycin and Teicoplanin. They were highly resistant to Penicillins, Quinolones, Clindamycin and so on (>40.0%). CONCLUSIONS: (1) Gram negative strains remain the commonest pathogens in biliary tract infection in Renji Hospital and the commonest pathogen is Escherichia coli. The infection of enterococcus is going up. The mixed infection cases happen mostly in acute biliary infection. (2) To treat biliary infection the broad-spectrum antibiotics which are effective to Escherichia coli are optimal choices. Ceftazidime or Ciprofloxacin may be used in mild biliary infection. Sulperazone or Amikacin may be used in severe biliary infection. Imipenem and Vancomycins may be used as second choice to treat the infection which other drugs are ineffective to.