BACKGROUND: In treatment-naive patients, a combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) containing tenofovir (TDF) and abacavir (ABC) with lamivudine leads to unacceptably high virological failure rates with frequent selection of reverse transcriptase mutations M184V and K65R. We explored the efficacy of at least 16 weeks of ABC + TDF-containing cART regimens in 307 antiretroviral-experienced HIV-1-infected individuals included in observational databases. METHODS: Virological failure was defined as an HIV RNA > 400 copies/ml after at least 16 weeks of treatment. Patients had received a median of three prior cART regimens. Of these, 76% concomitantly received a potent or high genetic barrier regimen (with at least one protease inhibitor [PI]) or non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor or thymidine analogue) while a third non-thymidine nucleoside analogue was used in the remaining patients. RESULTS: The 1-year estimated probability of virological failure was 34% in 165 patients with HIV RNA > 400 copies/ ml at ABC + TDF regimen initiation. Independent predictors of virological failure were the absence of a potent or high genetic barrier cART, the higher number of cART regimens experienced, and the use of a new drug class. In the subset of 136 patients for whom there were genotypic resistance test results prior to ABC + TDF initiation, the virological failure (1-year estimated probability 46%) was independently predicted by the higher baseline viral load, the concomitant use of boosted PI, and the presence of reverse transcriptase mutation M41L. In 142 patients starting ABC + TDF therapy with HIV RNA pound < or =400 copies/ml, virological failure (1-year estimated probability 17%) was associated only with the transmission category. In a small subset of subjects for whom there were an available paired baseline and follow-up genotype (n = 28), the prevalence of most nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitor resistance mutations decreased, suggesting a possible low adherence to treatment. No selection of K65R was detected. CONCLUSION: The virological response to ABC + TDF-containing regimens in this moderately-to-heavily treatment experienced cohort was good. Higher viral load and the presence of M41L at baseline were associated with worse virological responses, while the concomitant prescription of drugs enhancing the genetic barrier of the regimen conveyed a reduced risk of virological failure. The Appendix provides the names of other members of the MASTER cohort.