OBJECTIVE: To investigate the antimicrobial resistance and penicillin resistance-associated genes (TEM and pbp2B) of Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae) isolated from sputum specimens of Guangzhou children with respiratory tract infection. METHODS: E-test and Kirby-Bauer methods were applied to detect the antibiotic susceptibility of 44 strains of S. pneumoniae. PCR was used to detect resistance genes pbp2B and TEM, followed by DNA sequence analysis of pbp2B gene. The sequence results were compared to those of penicillin-susceptible S. pneumoniae R6. RESULTS: Of the 44 isolates of S. pneumoniae, only 5 (11.4%) were susceptible to penicillin. All strains were resistant to erythromycin but susceptible to ofloxacin and vancomycin. The resistance rate of the isolates to clindamycin and trimoxazole was more than 90%. The S. pneumoniae isolates showed a high susceptibility to amoxicillin, imipenem and ceftriaxone, with a resistance rate of 0, 2.6% and 3.9%, respectively. The sequence analysis showed that more than 99% nucleotide sequence of pbp2B gene of five penicillin-susceptible isolates was the same as penicillin-susceptible S. pneumoniae R6, without any amino acid replacement. Site mutation was found in the remaining 39 penicillin-nonsusceptible isolates with a nucleotide mutation rate ranging from 13.2% to 23.1% and amino acid replacement rate from 6.5% to 10.9%. The 39 penicillin-nonsusceptible isolates were classified into 4 types according to the mutation site between Ser391 and Thr492 of pbp2B: type I (n=30), type II (n=7), type III (n=1) and type IV (n=1). No TEM gene was detected in all the 44 S. pneumoniae isolates. CONCLUSIONS: The S.pneumoniae isolates from Guangzhou children with respiratory tract infection are resistant to penicillin and erythromycin. Amoxicillin and the third generation cephalosporin may be recommended for treating S. pneumoniae infection. The mutation of pbp2B gene plays an important role in the development of S. pneumoniae resistance to penicillin.