We conducted a retrospective observational study to assess epidemiological trends and risk factors associated with the 10 most common Salmonella serovars isolated from humans in Thailand between 2002 and 2007. A total of 11,656 Salmonella isolates covering all 6 years were included in the study. The top 10 Salmonella serovars identified during the course of this study were Enteritidis, Stanley, Weltevreden, Rissen, I [1],4,[5],12:i:-, Choleraesuis, Anatum, Typhimurium, Corvallis, and Panama, which accounted for 8108 (69.6%) of the isolates. Most isolates were from patients <5 years (33%), were isolated during June (13%), and were recovered from stool (82%) and from patients in Bangkok (27%). Statistical analysis revealed that S. Enteritidis and S. Choleraesuis were recovered from blood with a higher frequency than other nontyphoidal serovars. While both serovars tended to be isolated from patients >5 years; S. Choleraesuis was recovered with a higher frequency from patients in Bangkok and the central region, whereas S. Enteritidis was recovered predominantly from patients in the southern region. This study also indicates a shift in prevalence of the most common Salmonella serovars responsible for human infections in Thailand compared to previous studies. Notably, there was an increase in human infections with S. Stanley, S. Corvallis, and S. Choleraesuis, three serovars that have previously been associated with swine, and a decrease in infections due to S. Weltevreden and S. Anatum. The study also revealed differences in the epidemiology among the different serovars, suggesting that serovar-specific interventions are needed. We recommend initiating targeted interventions for the two serovars associated with a high odds ratio for submitted blood samples, S. Enteritidis and S. Choleraesuis. The authors also recommend additional epidemiologic studies to investigate the observed increase in swine associated serovars (S. Stanley, S. Corvallis, and S. Choleraesuis) and determine interventions to reduce the burden of disease from these serovars.