PURPOSE: The aim of study is to investigate role of co-surfactant in self-emulsification through rheological analysis of intermediate liquid crystalline (LC) phase formed during self-emulsification. METHODS: To mixture of Captex 200P (C200) and tween 80 (T80) (SES Plain), either medium hydrocarbon chain co-surfactant (Capmul MCM (CMCM): SES C) or long hydrocarbon chain co-surfactant (Peceol (P): SES P) was added separately at different concentration levels. Self-emulsification was monitored by visual observations, turbidimetric and droplet size measurement. Mesophases were obtained by 30% v/v aqueous hydration of SES and characterized by polarizing microscopy, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and rheological studies. RESULTS: SES Plain exhibited 'bad' emulsification owing to instantaneous gel formation in aqueous media. Almost all SES C have shown 'good' emulsification with transparent appearance, very low turbidity value and nano size droplets. All SES P presented 'moderate' emulsification with milky appearance, high turbidity value and coarse droplets. Polarizing microscopy revealed formation of lamellar phase in SES Plain and in all SES P while almost all SES C exhibited formation of micellar cubic phase. In DSC studies, higher extent of LC phase formation was observed in SES C as compared to SES P. Rheological study clearly demonstrated presence of elastic and partially recoverable mesophase in SES Plain, which was transformed into a viscous and non-recovering mesophase with addition of CMCM while there was no change in rheological status of SES Plain after addition of P. The weak and viscous LC phase in SES C must have not presented any resistance to strain induced deformation. Therefore, it might have ruptured easily and quickly, releasing jet of nanosize droplets whereas elastic mesophase in SES P might have ruptured with little resistance resulting in coarse droplets. CONCLUSION: The ability of co-surfactant to promote self-emulsification was attributed to their influence on viscoelastic properties of intermediate LC phase.