UNLABELLED: (Full text is available at http://www.manu.edu.mk/prilozi). In recent decades, the increase of Streptococcus pneumoniae strains resistant to beta-lactams, to other classes of antimicrobial drugs and especially to penicillin (penicillin-resistant pneumococcus - PRP) has further complicated the treatment of pneumococcal infection. Penicillin resistance in pneumococci is due to the development of altered penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) in the bacterial cell wall. PBPs are known as six different variants (PBP1a, 1b, 2x, 2a, 2b and 3). AIM: to compare the presence and types of genes responsible for penicillin resistance in Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates with the minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of penicillin as well as their correlation within the period of childhood. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 45 pneumococci obtained from nasal swabs and tracheal aspirates of children treated at the University Paediatric Clinic in Skopje were examined. According to age, the children were grouped as 1-3, 4-6 and 7-10 years. the oxacillin test (1microg) was used as a rapid screening test for the detection of PRP. MIC of penicillin were determined using the agar dilution method and interpreted according to NCCLS as resistant (if MIC are > 2 microg/ml), intermediate resistant (between 0,12-1.0 microg/ml) and susceptible (< 0,06 microg/ml). The genes pbp2b and pbp 2x, which are the genes mainly responsible for the onset of PRP, were detected using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). RESULTS: the oxacillin test showed that 38 pneumococci were resistant and 7 susceptible to penicillin. MIC of penicillin showed that 7 strains were resistant, 33 strains were intermediate resistant (12, 18, and 3 with MIC of 0.5 microg/ml, 0.25 microg/ml and 0.12 microg/ml, respectively) and 5 susceptible. According to MIC, of the total 40 resistant/intermediate resistant pneumococci, in 22 genes pbp2b and/or pbp2x, were confirmed (3 resistant strains with both genes; 7 intermediate resistant and 3 resistant strains with pbp2x genes; whereas 8 intermediate resistance and 1 susceptible strain with pbp2b). In a total of 11 strains (10 intermediate resistant and one resistant according to MIC), pbp2b and/or pbp2x genes were not detected, and their resistance is probably due to some other mechanisms or other genes that code PBP. The largest number of the examined pneumococci (32) were isolated from children aged 1-3 years and in 18 of them either pbp2b or pbp2x genes were detected. CONCLUSION: the oxacillin test is not suitable for discriminating the intermediate resistant and resistant pneumococci, while it is relevant for the detection of susceptible strains. Penicillin resistance of pneumococci that were causes of infection in children was on a lower level (15.5% resistant strains with MIC 1double dagger2 mg/ml and 73.3% intermediate resistant strains with MIC 0.12double dagger1 microg/ml). Pbp2b and/or pbp2x genes were detected in 22 of the examined strains and all of them except one were intermediate resistant or resistant. The Pbp2b gene is mostly present in the intermediate resistant strains and because it was detected in one susceptible strain, this gene is responsible for a low level of resistance. The pbp2x gene was detected in all the resistant strains and that is why we could conclude that it was coding the high level of resistance. Streptococcus pneumoniae was predominantly isolated from the age group 1-3 years where the PRP were not significant (Chi square; p > 0.05). Key words: Streptococcus pneumoniae, Penicillin resistance, Minimal Inhibitory Concentration (MIC), Genes of Resistance.