Efavirenz, a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor, has been an important component of the treatment of HIV infection for 10 years and has contributed significantly to the evolution of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). The efficacy of efavirenz has been established in numerous randomized trials and observational studies in HAART-naive patients, including those with advanced infection. In the ACTG A5142 study, efavirenz showed greater virological efficacy than the boosted protease inhibitor (PI), lopinavir. Efavirenz is more effective as a third agent than unboosted PIs or the nucleoside analogue abacavir. Some, but not all, studies have suggested that efavirenz (added to two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors) is more effective than nevirapine. Virological and immunological responses achieved with efavirenz-based HAART have been maintained for 7 years. Dosing convenience predicts adherence, and studies have demonstrated that patients can be switched from PI-based therapy to simplified, once-daily efavirenz-based regimens without losing virological control. The one-pill, once-daily formulation of efavirenz plus tenofovir and emtricitabine offers a particular advantage in this regard. Efavirenz also retains a role after failure of a first PI-based regimen. Efavirenz is generally well tolerated: rash and neuropsychiatric disturbances are the most notable adverse events. Neuropsychiatric disturbances generally develop early in treatment and they tend to resolve with continued administration, but they are persistent and troubling in a minority of patients. Efavirenz has less effect on plasma lipid profiles than some boosted PIs. Lipodystrophy can occur under treatment with efavirenz but it may be reduced if the concurrent use of thymidine analogues is avoided. Efavirenz resistance mutations (especially K103N) can be selected during long-term treatment, underscoring the importance of good adherence. Recent data have confirmed that efavirenz is a cost-effective option for first-line HAART. In light of these features, efavirenz retains a key role in HIV treatment strategies and is the first-line agent recommended in some guidelines.