AIMS: To compare the distribution of integrons and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance genes among Escherichia coli isolates from humans and food-producing animals. METHODS AND RESULTS: A collection of 174 multidrug-resistant E. coli isolates obtained from faecal samples of food-producing animals (n = 64) and humans (n = 59), and patients with urinary tract infections (n = 51) in Hong Kong during 2002-2004 were studied. The strains were analysed for their phylogenetic groups, the presence of sul genes (sul1 and sul2), integrons (intl1 and intl2) and class 1 integron-associated dfr cassette genes by PCR, restriction enzyme analysis and sequencing. Integrons were identified in 110 (63.2%) isolates. The prevalence of integrons was significantly different according to the specimen sources (animal faecal 84.4%, human faecal 67.8% and human urinary 31.4%) and phylogenetic groups (B1 80.8%, A 77.6%, D 54.1% and B2 11.5%). Faecal isolates (both human and animal) are more likely to belong to group A and B1. In contrast, most urinary isolates were either groups B2 and D. Among dfr containing isolates, dfrA1 and dfrA12 were almost exclusively found in strains of phylogenetic groups A and B1; and were present in animal and human faecal isolates. In contrast, dfrA17 was found in both faecal and urinary isolates and comprised strains from all phylogenetic groups. The sul1 and sul2 genes were equally prevalent among the isolates irrespective of the specimen source and phylogenetic group status. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analysis of isolates with identical cassette genes showed that they were genetically diverse. CONCLUSIONS: More animal faecal isolates carry class 1 integrons than human faecal and human urinary isolates, and the distribution of phylogenetic groups is common across animal and human faecal isolates but different from human urinary isolates. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Commensal isolates from food-producing animals are an important reservoir for integrons carrying antibiotic resistance genes.