STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort study. OBJECTIVE: We report the first study of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) in the spine. The aim was to determine the clinical, radiologic, and drug resistance profile as well as the factors associated with treatment outcome of MDR-TB in the spine. SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Tuberculosis of the spine is the most common extrapulmonary form of tuberculosis in the Asian subcontinent. The disease in few cases is resistant to the primary anti-Koch's medications and the number of cases detected is on the rise. Multidrug resistant form of tuberculosis of the spine is ill reported in the literature. The diagnosis, management thus remains a challenge to the treating surgeon. This study tries to assess these critical issues of this "new" disease. METHODS: Described here are the clinical characteristics of 25 MDR-TB spine patients identified in the study and their drug susceptibility patterns. They were followed up clinically, radiologically after a biopsy, culture, and Drug Susceptibility Testing. According to their Drug Susceptibility Testing pattern and previous history of Anti-Tubercular Treatment (ATT), individualized treatment regimens were tailored for each patient by an expert physician. RESULTS: Majority of the patients seen in the present study were in the productive years of their life. (Males (9) mean age: 38.5 years and females (16) mean age: 34.3 years. Four patients were defaulters of the ATT. The average number of drugs used was 6, including 4 second line drugs. Average treatment duration was 24 months. Almost 50% of the patients had adverse drug effects. Of the 25 patients, 19 achieved healed status and 6 are still on treatment. Four patients required surgery for mechanical instability of the spine. Radiologic improvement was observed in all the cases after a mean treatment of 6 months. Five predictors were identified for successful outcome of MDR-TB. They include progressive clinical improvement at 6 months, radiologic improvement during treatment and disease with Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains exhibiting resistance to less than or up to 3 antitubercular drugs, use of less than or up to 4 second-line drugs in treatment, and no change of regimen during treatment. CONCLUSION: MDR-TB of the spine is a different disease and is here to stay. There is an urgent need to include culture and drug susceptibility testing in the protocol for the treatment of tuberculosis of the spine.