The occurrence of bacterial strains resistant to different antimicrobials is a growing problem in Latin American countries. The aim was to measure the antimicrobial susceptibility of Fusobacterium nucleatum, Prevotella intermedia and Prophyromona gingivalis, isolated from chronic periodontitis patients. Twenty-five patients diagnosed with generalized- moderate or advanced- chronic periodontitis were consecutively recruited from patients attending the Periodontal Specialist Program, Javeriana University, according to specific criteria, including no recent antibiotic consumption. All patients filled out a questionnaire on antibiotic intake. The deepest periodontal pocket in each quadrant was sampled. Pooled samples were mixed, diluted and plated on enriched brucella agar plates. After anaerobic incubation, identification of the target bacteria was performed, based on colony morphology, gram staining, aerotolerance and biochemical reactions (RapID Ana II, Remel, U.S.A.). Following identification, the bacteria were subjected to antimicrobial testing, using amoxicillin, tetracycline, doxycicline, azithromycin and metronidazole (E-test, AbBiodisk, Sweden). The minimal inhibitory concentrations obtained were compared with a reference standard to determine antimicrobial resistance. Amoxicillin-resistant species were tested for beta-lactamase production. Forty-four percent of the patients used antibiotics without any medical prescription, 40% used antibiotics at least once a year. The presence of eleven species was confirmed after a series of biochemical tests: four Fusobacterium nucleatum, five Prevotella intermedia and two Prophyromona gingivalis. All strains were resistant to metronidazole, five were resistant to tetracycline and azithromicin, and two strains were resistant to doxycicline and amoxicillin. The strains resistant to amoxicillin were positive for beta-lactamase production, Antimicrobial resistance, particularly against metronidazole, was a common phenomenon for the bacterial isolates analyzed in this Colombian sample.