Bacteria isolated from infections in abdominal surgery during the period from April 2007 to March 2008 were investigated in a multicenter study in Japan, and the following results were obtained. In this series, 707 strains including 24 strains of Candida spp. were isolated from 181 (79.0%) of 229 patients with surgical infections. Three hundred and ninety-five strains were isolated from primary infections, and 288 strains were isolated from postoperative infections. From primary infections, anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria were predominant, followed by aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, while from postoperative infections aerobic Gram-positive bacteria were predominant, followed by anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria. Among aerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Enterococcus spp. was highest, followed by Streptococcus spp., and Staphylococcus spp. in this order, from primary infections, while Enterococcus spp. was highest, followed by Staphylococcus spp. from postoperative infections. Among aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Escherichia coli was the most predominantly isolated from primary infections, followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter cloacae, in this order, and from postoperative infections, P. aeruginosa was most predominantly isolated, followed by E. cloacae, E. coli and K. pneumoniae. Among anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Parvimonas micra was the highest from primary infections, followed by Streptococcus constellatus and Gemella morbillorum, and from postoperative infections, Anaerococcus prevotii was most predominantly isolated. Among anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, the isolation rate of both Bacteroides fragilis and Bilophila wadsworthia were the highest from primary infections, followed by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Campylobacter gracilis, and from postoperative infections, B. thetaiotaomicron was most predominately isolated, followed by B. fragilis, Bacteroides caccae and B. wadsworthia in this order. In this series, we noticed no vancomycin-resistant Gram-positive cocci, nor multidrug-resistant P aeruginosa. There were nine strains of coagulase-negative Staphylococci which show higher MIC against teicoplanin more than 4 gg/mL, but all of them had good susceptibilities against various anti-MRSA antibiotics. We should carefully follow up B. wadsworthia which was resistant to various antibiotics, and also Bacteroides spp. which was resistant to many beta-lactam antibiotics.