Multidrug-resistance (MDR) is the major reason for failure of cancer therapy. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters contribute to drug resistance via ATP-dependent drug efflux. P-glycoprotein (Pgp), which is encoded by MDR1 gene, confers resistance to certain anticancer agents. The development of agents able to modulate MDR mediated by Pgp and other ABC transporters remained a major goal for the past 20 years. The calcium blocker verapamil was the first drug shown to be a modulator of Pgp, and since many different chemical compounds have been shown to exert the same effect in vitro by blocking Pgp activity. These included particularly immunosuppressors. Cyclosporin A (CSA) was the first immunosuppressor that have been shown to modulate Pgp activity in laboratory models and entered very early into clinical trials for reversal of MDR. The proof of reversing activity of CSA was found in phase II studies with myeloma and acute leukemia. In phase III studies, the results were less convincing regarding the response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival, which were detected in advanced refractory myeloma. The non-immunosuppressive derivative PSC833 (valspodar) was subsequently developed. This compound showed tenfold higher potency in reversal of MDR mediated by Pgp. However, pharmacokinetic interactions required reductions in the dose of the concurrently administered anticancer agents. The pharmacokinetic interactions were likely because of decreased clearance of the anticancer agents, possibly as a result of Pgp inhibition in organs such as the gastrointestinal tract and kidney, as well as inhibition of cytochrome P450. Finally, CSA and PSC833 have been shown also to modulate the ceramide metabolism which stands as second messenger of anticancer agent-induced apoptosis. In fact, CSA and PSC833 are also able to respectively inhibit ceramide glycosylation and stimulate de novo ceramide synthesis. This could enhance the cellular level of ceramide and potentiate apoptosis induced by some anticancer agents.