OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical, imaging and pathogenic features of pulmonary nocardiosis and the drug resistance of Nocardia. METHODS: The clinical and radiological data of 2 cases of pulmonary nocardiosis in this hospital were presented, and 32 cases reported in the Chinese literature since 1982 were reviewed. RESULTS: Among the 34 cases of Nocardia infections, there were 26 cases of pulmonary nocardiosis, and 4 of whom died. Multiple organ infection occurred in 11 patients, including 7 with pulmonary and skin infections, 3 with pulmonary, skin and intracranial infections, and 1 with pulmonary and intracranial infections. All patients with pulmonary nocardiosis had cough. Of the 34 cases, 27 had fever, including intermittent fever in 5, and sustained fever in 22 cases. Of the 11 cases of pulmonary nocardiosis complicated with skin or intracranial dissemination, 8 patients were immunocompromised and 3 were immunocompetent (chi(2) = 2.08, P > 0.05). Three cases died in the immunocompromised group and 1 died in the immunocompetent group. Nocardia asteroides was identified in 14 cases, Nocardia brasiliensis in 4 cases, and the other 8 were not classified. In the patients with complicated skin or intracranial infections, 8 were caused by Nocardia asteroids, and 2 were caused by Nocardia brasiliensis. Chest X-ray or CT imaging of the lungs showed pleural effusion in 8, masses in 7, infiltrates in 6, cavities in 6, and nodular lesions in 5 cases. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing showed that Nocardia was sensitive to sulfonamide, amikacin, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, minocycline, fluoroquinolones, and linezolid. CONCLUSIONS: Immunosuppression is the most important predisposing factor for pulmonary nocardiosis. The most common pathogenic bacterium is Nocardia asteroids, which is frequently associated with disseminated lesions. The radiographic abnormalities of the lung show pleural effusion, masses, infiltration or cavity. With the increasing rate of resistance of Nocardia to the sulfonamide, the combination of antibiotic regimen according to susceptibility testing needs to be considered. Poor outcome is mostly found in immunocompromised hosts.