AIM: To determine whether the fungicide, carbendazim, as applied to pastures for controlling facial eczema (FE), would inhibit development of the free-living stages of the gastrointestinal nematode parasite Trichostrongylus colubriformis. METHODS: Two studies were conducted, using sheep faeces containing eggs of T. colubriformis. In the first, the faeces were either exposed or not to an application of carbendazim sprayed at the recommended rate for FE control. After spraying, dishes containing the faeces were incubated at 20 degrees C for 14 days, and the resulting third-stage infective larvae (L3) extracted by baermannisation and counted. In addition, naturally infested pasture was also sprayed, and the number of L3 present 7 days later was assessed by cutting herbage samples and extracting larvae by soaking in water and baermannisation. In the second, the faeces were incubated at 20 degrees C for 0, 3 or 7 days before being exposed to no, one or two applications of carbendazim. After further incubation for 14, 11 or 7 days, L3 were similarly extracted by baermannisation and counted. RESULTS: In the first study, there was a 74% reduction in the number of T. colubriformis larvae recovered from faeces exposed to carbendazim compared with faeces not exposed, but there was no reduction in the number of L3 recovered from herbage. In the second study, faeces incubated for 0 or 3 days prior to exposure to a single application of carbendazim yielded 98% or 89% fewer larvae, respectively, than faeces not exposed. Faeces incubated for 7 days prior to exposure yielded similar numbers of larvae to faeces not exposed. CONCLUSION: Treatment of pastures with carbendazim for FE control is likely to result in reduced development of the larvae of T. colubriformis, and by inference those of other species, where the application coincides with the presence of freshly deposited faeces containing eggs and developing larvae. However, no effect of treatment on L3 was indicated. The significance of this for on-farm nematode parasite control remains to be determined, as does any potential for strategic applications of carbendazim to pasture aimed at reducing numbers of parasite larvae on pasture. The latter should not be contemplated without due consideration of the implications for the development of anthelmintic resistance.