AIM: To examine the effect of an anthelmintic treatment to lambs, followed immediately by a shift onto pastures with differing levels of larval contamination, on the development of anthelmintic resistance, in order to support recommendations to farmers regarding drench-and-shift practices for sustainable worm control. METHODS: Newly weaned Romney lambs (n=72) were dosed with third-stage infective larvae (L3) of two nematode parasite species, Teladorsagia (=Ostertagia) circumcincta and Trichostrongylus colubriformis, comprising benzimidazole-resistant and -susceptible isolates, calculated to yield, after treatment with albendazole, a 95% reduction in faecal nematode egg count (FEC). Once infections became patent (Day 0), lambs were randomised into nine groups of eight animals, treated with albendazole at the manufacturer's recommended dose rate, and moved to individual pastures each previously prepared to have one of three different levels of parasite larval infestation (Treatment 1 = low contamination, Treatment 2 = medium contamination, and Treatment 3 = high contamination), and grazed on those pastures before receiving a second treatment with albendazole at Day 47. Anthelmintic resistance status in each group of lambs was measured using FEC reduction (FECR) and egg-hatch assays (EHA) after the first anthelmintic treatment, and FECR after the second treatment. RESULTS: Egg-hatch assays demonstrated significant differences between treatments. The concentration of anthelmintic required to kill 50% of the eggs (LC50) for Treatment 1, comprising the least contaminated pastures, was significantly higher than for Treatments 2 and 3 on Days 33 and 40. Treatment 1 also had a significantly lower FECR at the final anthelmintic treatment, and significantly lower FEC than the other two treatments from Days 26 to 47. CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrated that the populations of T. circumcincta and T. colubriformis in lambs treated with anthelmintic had significantly higher levels of albendazole resistance at the end of the grazing period in lambs moved onto pastures with relatively low levels of parasite contamination than those moved onto pastures with relatively higher contamination, confirming drench-and-shift onto 'clean' pasture as a high-risk practice for the selection for anthelmintic resistance. While this does not necessarily preclude the use of this practice it does emphasise the importance of taking appropriate remedial action to minimise the risk.