AIMS: To evaluate the survival of Pediococcus acidilactici UL5 and its ability to produce pediocin PA-1 during transit in an artificial gastrointestinal tract (GIT). To investigate the physicochemical and biological stability of purified pediocin PA-1 under GIT conditions. METHODS AND RESULTS: Skim milk culture of Ped. acidilactici UL5 was fed to a dynamic gastrointestinal (GI) model known as TIM-1, comprising four compartments connected by computer-controlled peristaltic valves and simulating the human stomach, duodenum, jejunum and ileum. This strain tolerated a pH of 2.7 in the gastric compartment, while lower pH reduced its viability. Bile salts in the duodenal compartment brought a further 4-log reduction after 180 min of digestion, while high viable counts (up to 5 x 10(7) CFU ml(-1) fermented milk) of Ped. acidilactici were found in both the jejunal and ileal compartments. Pediococcus acidilactici recovered from all four compartments was able to produce pediocin at the same level as unstressed cells. The activity of the purified pediocin in the gastric compartment was slightly reduced after 90 min of gastric digestion, while no detectable activity was found in the duodenal, jejunal and ileal compartments during 5 h of digestion. HPLC analysis showed partial degradation of the pediocin peptide in the duodenal compartment and massive breakdown in the jejunal and ileal compartments. CONCLUSIONS: Pediococcus acidilactici UL5 showed high resistance to GIT conditions, and its ability to produce pediocin was not affected, suggesting its potential as a probiotic candidate. The physicochemical and biological stability of pediocin was significantly poor under GIT conditions. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Pediococcus acidilactici UL5 appears to be a potential probiotic candidate because its capacity to produce pediocin PA-1 is not affected by the GI conditions as well as the strain shows an acceptable survival rate. Meanwhile, purified pediocin PA-1 losses activity during GIT transit; microcapsules could be used to deliver it to the target site.