Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a frequent cause of respiratory infections in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. P. aeruginosa strains isolated from these patients have often a mucoid phenotype at advanced disease. This mucoid structure contains a dense amount of alginate type polysaccharide which facilitates bacterial attachment to lung epithelia and provides protection from the immune system due to biofilm formation. The aims of this study were to investigate the biofilm formation and the relation of this property with genotype and antibiotic susceptibilities of P. aeruginosa strains isolated from CF patients. The biofilm formation was determined by using the Congo Red agar and Christensen methods. RAPD-PCR (Random amplification of polymorphic DNA polymerase chain reaction) and disc diffusion methods were used for genotyping and antibiotic susceptibility testing, respectively. Biofilm production was found positive in 33.3% (20/60) of P. aeruginosa tested. While 9 of these 20 isolates were of mucoid colony morphotype, among the 40 biofilm negative isolates mucoid colony was detected in 16 of them. RAPD genotyping based on 70% similarity yielded 19 (A-S) clusters and subtypes related to five of these clusters (K1, K2, N1, N2, Q1, Q2, R1, R2, S1, S2) making up a total of 24 genotypes. Nine of these genotypes composed of biofilm positive isolates and 15 were biofilm negative ones. Most of the biofilm positive strains belonged to K1 (n = 5) and K2 (n = 6) genotypes while biofilm negative isolates were in the L (n = 8) and O (n = 7) genotypes. The comparison of antibiotic susceptibilities in both groups revealed no statistically significant difference (p > 0.0%). However, highest rate of resistance was detected for tobramycin and lowest rate for piperacillin/tazobactam. The data obtained from this study indicated that biofilm negative and positive P. aeruginosa isolates clustered in different groups. These results should be supported with larger scale multi-center studies which may provide information about P. aeruginosa dynamics in CF lungs.