BACKGROUND: Antibiotic consumption has an important effect on microbial resistance. Nationwide data on the comparative use of antibiotics in outpatient settings in Israel have only been partially collected and published. The aim of our study was to analyze the use of antibiotics in the outpatient setting in Israel and assess a number of influencing factors. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Defined daily doses per 1,000 inhabitants per day (DID) of total antibiotic use, consumption in different age groups, and consumption of different antibiotic groups were calculated for the years 2003-2005 in the districts of Israel. The data was collected from prescription data compiled by the pharmaceutical services of "Clalit Health Services", the largest health maintenance organization (HMO) in Israel, covering 55% of the population.Trends in use and variables associated with antibiotic consumption were analyzed. RESULTS: There was a significant decrease in antibiotic use from 2003 to 2005, ranging from 1.8 to 8.2% in the different districts. The highest consumption was noted in the youngest age groups, with more than half of all antibiotics prescribed to children < or = 18 years of age. Antibiotic consumption was significantly different between the different regions in Israel. A multivariate analysis revealed that a higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus was the only significant variable associated with antibiotic use. Variability in the use of different antibiotics was also found; for example, amoxicillin comprised 19.5-33.4% of total antibiotic consumption in the different districts, while fluoroquinolone consumption ranged from 3.2 to 7.3%. CONCLUSIONS: Outpatient antibiotic use in the population insured by "Clalit Health Services" declined between 2003 and 2005. Children had the highest consumption rates. There were large differences in antibiotic use between geographic regions, and diabetes mellitus was the only variable significantly associated with antibiotic use. We therefore conclude that most of the differences in antibiotic use are likely due to doctor preferences, local routines, and patients' attitudes and expectations.