In order to advance the application of antimicrobial peptides in aquaculture, transgenic zebrafish expressing the antimicrobial peptide, epinecidin-1, were developed and are reported on here. First, we cloned the zebrafish mylz2 promoter for this purpose. To characterize the activity of the mylz2 promoter, various fragments of it were analyzed using a firefly luciferase transient expression assay, in which maximum promoter activity was found with a 2.5-kb fragment. In addition, the 2.5-kb fragment also expressed considerable red fluorescent proteins in skeletal muscles of transgenic zebrafish. Second, in order to improve the translation efficiency of the Tol2 transposase, we constructed untranslated regions (UTRs) of zebrafish ba1 globin flanked by a transposase. A transient embryonic excision assay (TEEA) and in vivo fluorescent observations showed high transposition efficiency during embryonic development. After optimization of the promoter and transgene efficiencies, transgenic zebrafish with the Epi-1/DsRed plasmid (pTLR-m2.5 K-K.Epinecidin-1/DsRed vector) were developed, and expressions of Epi-1/DsRed in muscles and blood were demonstrated by immunohistochemical staining techniques. Moreover, we also found that the Epi-1/DsRed gene was efficiently and significantly expressed in vivo against Vibrio vulnificus and Streptococcus agalactiae after injecting the bacteria and determining bacterial counts. A gene expression study using real-time RT-PCR revealed that Epi-1/DsRed itself induced endogenous MyD88 expression in vivo. After Epi-1/DsRed transgenic zebrafish were infected with V. vulnificus 204, interleukin (IL)-10, IL-22, IL-26, lysozyme, toll-like receptor (TLR)1, TLR3, TLR4a, MyD88, and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB activating protein-like were upregulated, but IL-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha were downregulated at 12h post-infection; IL-21, complement component c3b, and NF-kappaB activating protein-like were downregulated, but MyD88 was upregulated at 24h post-infection. These results suggest that using epinecidin-1 as a transgene in zebrafish can effectively inhibit bacterial growth for up to 24h after infection.