OBJECTIVE: To analyze the difference of virulence-related protein concerned with type III secretion system (T3SS) in Pseudomonas aeruginosa during the changes of antibiotic sensitivity and interpret the clinical patient data to explore the relationship between the changes in resistance and variance of virulence. METHODS: The isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated from the respiratory tract of a same patient with an altered sensitivity of antibiotics. It turned out to be one clone. The homolog of isolates was determined by ERIC-PCR. The Kirby-Bauer antibiotic testing was employed to detect the sensitivity of antibiotics of isolates. PCR was used to detect the gene of T3SS and virulence of isolates and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis to compare the whole-cell proteins. The mass spectrometry was employed to analyze a variety of protein spots. The relevant information was retrieved from protein databases. Clinical record was collected to study the relationship of clinical features, bacteria resistance and virulence-associated protein. RESULTS: One subject was diagnosed with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) complicated with pneumonia. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated from his respiratory tract three times in one year. Sensitivity spectrum of isolates were as follows: sensitivity, multi-drug resistant (MDR) and pan-drug resistance (PDR). Virulence gene was exo U+/exo S-. Twenty-one differentially expressed proteins were revealed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis in three isolates. The functions of 11 proteins were definite. Only 9 proteins were associated with basal bacterial metabolism. Disulfide oxidoreductase A (DsbA) corresponded to the variation of virulence and sensitivity spectrum. Clinical record revealed that the severe lung infection was caused by the PDR strain and the patient died within one month. CONCLUSIONS: The sensitivity spectrum and virulence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa may undergo changes when there is an alteration of eco-environment during colonization and infection over a long period of time. DsbA plays a key role in the variety of virulence.