Tigecycline is a new semi-synthetic antibiotic from the glycylcycline class of antibiotics. In the Czech Republic this preparation is registered only primarily for complicated skin infections and infection of soft tissues, along with complicated intra-abdominal infections. In future its indications will perhaps widen to include respiratory tract infections, as is the case in the USA. So far we don't have sufficient data about the use of tigecycline in the treatment of critically ill patients, and in these patients it should not be the treatment of first choice. However, it remains to be seen whether increasing resistance and insufficient new types of antibiotics will force us to use tigecycline in these indications as well. Bacterial infections still present a huge threat to severely burned patients. Lately, in patients with burn trauma, as the source of infection complications have begun to dominate significantly multiresistant strains of bacteria. These bacteria originate from gram positive as well as gram negative spectrum. In severely burned patients the early and correct indication of antibiotic treatment, as well as the appropriate choice of antibiotics, forms one of the foundations of successful treatment. At the Department of Burns and Reconstructive Surgery we first used tigecycline on August 9th 2008 in the treatment of non-healing defects after autotransplant with dermo-epidermal grafts in the face, where the source of infection was identified as mixed bacterial microflora. The treatment was successful. Since then tigecycline has become a standard antibiotic at our workplace. In the observed period of 12 months we have used the antibiotic in 11 patients. Thanks to a wide antibacterial spectrum, monotherapy with tigecycline constitutes an interesting alternative to the frequently difficult combination of antibiotics used in other treatments. In this work we present our clinical experience, results, indications as well as difficulties in tigecycline treatment.