In the attempt to enrich the local contemporary laboratory data regarding the group B streptococcus (GBS) colonization, isolates obtained from the vaginal swab cultures were characterized for their serotype distribution and antibiotic susceptibility. The 100 GBS isolates analyzed were collected during a four-month period of year 2009 from women screened in ambulatory for vaginal carriage of GBS. The GBS isolates were classified based on their capsular polysaccharide structures using commercially available antisera. Susceptibility to penicillin, ampicillin, erithromycin, clindamycin, tetracycline, ofloxacin, and chloramphenicol was initially tested using antibiotic disk diffusion technique according to CLSI guidelines. Minimum inhibitory concentrations of erythromycin and tetracycline for the isolates with reduced susceptibility were evaluated according to the CLSI criteria and macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B (MLSB) resistance was investigated by a double-disk test with erythromycin and clindamycin disks. All the GBS isolates were serotypeable. Their distribution comprised six different serotypes of which serotypes II (26%), III (26%), and Ia (19%) prevailed and no serotype VI, VII, and VIII isolates were found. Overall, the GBS isolates were fully susceptible to penicillin and ampicillin, but the rates of susceptibility to the other antimicrobial agents tested were decreased, ranging from 87% for chloramphenicol to 5% for tetracycline. Reduced susceptibility to clindamycin and erythromycin was detected in 18% and 19% of isolates, respectively. For the latter, 84% displayed a constitutive MLSB phenotype, 11% had an inducible MLSB phenotype, and M phenotype was expressed by 5% of them. Erythromycin-resistant GBS isolates displayed concurrently resistance to at least one more antibiotic. In conclusion, according to our study the most frequent GBS serotypes isolated from the vaginal microflora were II and III, followed by serotype Ia. While the GBS isolates remain susceptible to beta-lactams, resistance to alternative antimicrobial drugs such as erythromycin and clindamycin seems to be an increasing concern for our region. Further phenotypic and genotypic studies are required to identify specific aspects of GBS strains colonizing or infecting the local population.