OBJECTIVE: We describe the antimicrobial susceptibility to extended-spectrum cephalosporins in non-Typhi Salmonella (NTS) isolated from humans in the United States and explore resistance mechanisms for isolates displaying decreased susceptibility to ceftriaxone or ceftiofur. We further explore the concordance between the newly revised Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) breakpoints for ceftriaxone and the presence of a beta-lactamase. METHODS: In 2005 and 2006, public health laboratories in all U.S. state health departments forwarded every 20th NTS isolate from humans to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as part of the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) for enteric bacteria. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined by broth microdilution. Isolates displaying decreased susceptibility (MIC >/= 2 mg/L) to ceftriaxone or ceftiofur were included in the study. The presence of beta-lactamase genes was investigated by polymerase chain reaction amplification and sequencing, targeting six different genes (bla(TEM), bla(OXA), bla(SHV), bla(CTX-M), bla(PSE), and bla(CMY)). Plasmid location of bla(CMY) was confirmed by transforming plasmids into Escherichia coli. RESULTS: Among the 4236 isolates of NTS submitted to NARMS in 2005 and 2006, 175 (4.1%) displayed decreased susceptibility to either ceftriaxone or ceftiofur. By polymerase chain reaction screening, one or more beta-lactamase genes could be detected in 139 (80.8%) isolates. The most prevalent resistance mechanism detected was the AmpC beta-lactamase gene bla(CMY.) Other beta-lactamase genes detected included 11 bla(TEM-1), 3 bla(PSE-1), 2 bla(OXA-1), and 1 bla(CTX-M-15). The ceftriaxone MIC values for the bla(CMY)-containing isolates ranged from 4 to 64 mg/L; all bla(CMY)-bearing isolates were classified as ceftriaxone resistant according to current CLSI guidelines. CONCLUSIONS: Among NTS isolates submitted to NARMS in 2005 and 2006, cephamycinase beta-lactamases are the predominant cause of decreased susceptibility to ceftriaxone. The fact that all bla(CMY)-containing isolates were classified as resistant to ceftriaxone (MIC >/= 4 mg/L) supports the newly revised CLSI breakpoints for cephalosporins and Enterobacteriaceae.