ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE: Psacalium peltatum (H.B.K.) Cass. (Asteraceae) is used medicinally to treat diabetes, rheumatic pains, as well as gastrointestinal and kidney ailments. Previous pharmacological and chemical assays have demonstrated that an aqueous fraction from Psacalium peltatum (AP-fraction) contains a carbohydrate-type compound with hypoglycemic activity. Nevertheless, studies have not yet considered the hypoglycemic action of the AP-faction by sub-chronic administration nor on other healing properties, some of which might be associated with DM2 and other inflammatory processes. AIM OF STUDY: To determine whether a hypoglycemic carbohydrate fraction (AP-fraction) from Psacalium peltatum roots has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects in streptozotocin-induced diabetes mice. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Healthy mice received either saline, the AP-fraction with a high content of fructans, or pioglitazone (a positive control) daily by gavage. After 15 days of treatment, these animals received a single intraperitoneal administration of streptozotocin and all treatments were continued for additional 33 days. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of the AP-fraction were evaluated through the quantification of biomarkers of oxidative stress (glutathione (GSH) and malondialdehyde (MDA)) and inflammation (interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and IL-10). RESULTS: The AP-fraction reduced glycemia and the glycated hemoglobin. Furthermore, animals treated with the AP-fraction had increased GSH, while MDA was decreased in the liver and the heart, without changes in the kidneys and the pancreas. The AP-fraction significantly reduced TNF-alpha serum levels but did not modify IL-6; in addition, this fraction increased IFN-gamma and IL-10 levels. The increase in IL-10 levels may indicate an inhibition of the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha, whereas the increase in IFN-gamma might be indicative of a beneficial effect on the immune system. CONCLUSIONS: The AP-fraction hypoglycemic fructans from Psacalium peltatum roots showed antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties in mice with streptozotocin-induced diabetes. The Psacalium peltatum hypoglycemic fructans may be valuable in preventing insulin resistance, as well as the development and progression of diabetic complications caused by chronic inflammation.