In the present article, we summarize our studies of antrycide-resistance of Trypanosoma brucei evansi in four aspects in the last recent several years, the analysis of quinapyramine-sensitive situation of T. b. evansi in China, biological characteristics of T. b. evansi population in quinapyramine-resistance and biological materials of quinapyramine-resistance in T. b. evansi population. Firstly, the correlative assays of effective dosage of quinapyramine on T. b. evansi disease between in vivo and in vitro methods showed that their relationship was parabolic with positive correlation. On the other hand, the IC(50) and CD(100) values of 12 T. b. evansi isolates, AHB, GDB1, GDB2, HNB, JSB1, JSB2, YNB, ZJB, GDH, GXM, HBM and XJCA, collected from buffaloes, horses, mules and camels across nine provinces of China were examined using the two methods, respectively. Among them, the nine isolates, AHB, GDB1, GDB2, HNB, JSB1, JSB2, YNB, ZJB and GDH, became quinapyramine-sensitive T. b. evansi. Secondly, T. evansi populations could rapidly obtain antrycide-resistance when they were passed through immunosuppressed mice treated with low doses of the drug. But, the replication rate of trypanosomes with antrycide-resistance decreases as the level of drug-resistance increases. Thirdly, the analysis of the HK, G6PDH, ALAT and ASAT isoenzymes showed that they were not involved in the quinapyramine-resistance of T. b. evansi. But the protein bands of 15.79kDa and 19.76kDa might be involved in the antrycide-resistance of T. b. evansi population. At genetic level, the gene, TbTA1, could be amplified from the T. b. evansi isolate sensitive to quinapyramine-sensitivity but the T. b. evansi isolate with quinapyramine-resistance using not only the RT-PCR technique, but also PCR technique. We used the SSH (Suppression Subtractive Hybridization) to clone highly or low expressed cDNA fragments caused by production of antrycide-resistance in T. b. evansi. The 5 low and 9 high expressed new cDNA fragments were amplified. Among them, the 3 low expressed cDNA fragments had the same sequence of 65 amino acids and the 3 high expressed cDNA fragments were located in chromosome VI, like T. brucei. Lastly, more work needs to be done in order to elucidate the mechanism of quinapyramine-resistance of T. b. evansi.