The current paradigm for modeling viral kinetics and resistance evolution after treatment initiation considers only the level of circulating virus and cellular infection (CI model), while the intra-cellular level is disregarded. This model was successfully used to explain HIV dynamics and Hepatitis C virus (HCV) dynamics during interferon-based therapy. However, in the new era of direct-acting antiviral agents (DAAs) against HCV, viral kinetics is characterized by a more rapid decline of the wild-type virus as well as an early emergence of resistant strains that jeopardize the treatment outcome. Although the CI model can be extended to describe these new kinetic patterns, this approach has qualitative and quantitative limitations. Instead, we suggest that a more appropriate approach would consider viral dynamics at the cell infection level, as done currently, as well as at the intracellular level. Indeed, whereas in HIV integrated DNA serves as a static replication unit and mutations occur only once per infected cell, HCV replication is deeply affected by DAAs and furthermore processes of resistance evolution can occur at the intra-cellular level with a faster time-scale. We propose a comprehensive model of HCV dynamics that considers both extracellular and intracellular levels of infection (ICCI model). Intracellular viral genomic units are used to form replication units, which in turn synthesize genomic units that are packaged and secreted as virions infecting more target cells. Resistance evolution is modeled intra-cellularly, by different genomic- and replication-unit strains with particular relative-fitness and drug sensitivity properties, allowing for a rapid resistance takeover. Using the ICCI model, we show that the rapid decline of wild-type virus results from the ability of DAAs to destabilize the intracellular replication. On the other hand, this ability also favors the rapid emergence, intracellularly, of resistant virus. By considering the interaction between intracellular and extracellular infection we show that resistant virus, able to maintain a high level of intracellular replication, may nevertheless be unable to maintain rapid enough de novo infection rate at the extracellular level. Hence this model predicts that in HCV, and contrary to our experience with HIV, the emergence of productively resistant virus may not systematically prevent from a viral decline in the long-term. Thus, the ICCI model can explain the transient viral rebounds observed with DAA treatment as well as the viral resistance found in most patients with viral relapse at the end of DAA combination therapy.