A case of a dog with a long-term inflammatory skin disorder due to infection with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (MRSP) is described. After initial diagnostics of MRSP, follow-up swabs of the dog (nose, skin) were taken twice after four and seven weeks. MRSP was constantly isolated from the skin and once from the nose. Since infected humans might be a source of reinfection, the owners of the dog were screened (nasal) three times during their pet's therapy. Thereby, the male owner was found to be colonized with MRSP once in the first sampling round. Comparative typing of all MRSP-isolates by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), SCCmec typing, multilocus sequence typing (MLST), spa typing, PCR-detection of the leukotoxin encoding operon (LukI) and the Staphylococcus intermedius-exfoliative toxin (SIET) as well as antimicrobial resistance profiling by broth microdilution revealed that all five MRSP isolates from the dog and the single isolate from the owner were indistinguishable by any of the applied methods. All isolates were assigned to a certain strain, a multidrug-resistant MRSP belonging to sequence type (ST) 71, spa type (t)05, harbouring SCCmecIII as well as the genes encoding LukI and SIET. In this case, a number of reasons might have contributed to therapy failure and re-infection, respectively (e. g. contact to other MRSP-colonized dogs, contact to MRSP-colonized humans, refusal to clip the dog's fur). In addition, MRSP-contaminated objects or surfaces in the household, which were difficult to disinfect or simply not considered as a potential source of MRSP, might have served as a source of re-infection. These results envision the possibility of a dog-to-human transmission of MRSP and the relevance of this aspect as a potential source of re-infection in cases of bacterial-supported long-term skin disorders in canine patients. First cases of MRSP infections in humans have been described only recently. However, the general pathogenic potential of multidrug resistant MRSP in humans is unknown so far and needs further investigation.