In this study, random amplified polymorphic DNA polymerase chain reaction (RAPD-PCR) was used to identify polymorphic genomic DNA that would discriminate among cyromazine-resistant, abamectin-resistant, and susceptible Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess) (Diptera: Agromyzidae) leafminers. Using a reference strain that was susceptible to both cyromazine and abamectin, and a cyromazine-resistant strain and an abamectin-resistant strain, 400 oligonucleotides were assayed using RAPD-PCR. We found that two oligonucleotides, B10 and G16, amplified unique bands in the cyromazine-resistant strain but not in the reference or abamectin-resistant strains. Three oligonucleotides, K04, J13, and I02, showed polymorphisms unique to the abamectin-resistant strain but not in the reference or cyromazine-resistant strain. Leaf dip bioassays and RAPD-PCR were performed on two additional reference strains, seven strains from commercial ornamental production greenhouses, and one field strain. The two reference strains were negative for the resistance-correlated oligonucleotides. Of the seven strains from ornamental greenhouses, leaf dip bioassays showed that five had some level of resistance to both abamectin and cyromazine, whereas two were susceptible. The field strain was susceptible to both cyromazine and abamectin. In RAPD-DNA analyses, the five strains with abamectin resistance were positive for the three abamectin resistance-correlated oligonucleotides K04, J13, and I02. In the cases of cyromazine resistance, the five strains with cyromazine resistance were positive for the two cyromazine resistance-correlated oligonucleotides B10 and G16. The field strain and two greenhouse strains that were susceptible in leaf dip bioassays were negative for all three abamectin resistance-correlated oligonucleotides. The field strain and one greenhouse strain were negative for the two cyromazine resistance-correlated oligonucleotides; however, one greenhouse strain that was susceptible to cyromazine in leaf dip bioassay tested positive for one of the cyromazine resistance-correlated oligonucleotides. This method can be used to quickly identify cyromazine resistance, abamectin resistance, or both in leafminers, enabling a grower to choose an effective insecticide for leafminer control in a timely manner.