EARSS (European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System) is the biggest antimicrobial resistance surveillance project in the world financed from public finds, aiming to provide validated and comparable official data on antimicrobial resistance of invasive microbial strains (isolated from blood and CSF), belonging to 6 indicator bacterial species, i.e.: S. aureus, E. coli, E. faecium/faecalis, Str. pneumoniae, Ps. aeruginosa, K. pneumoniae. Romania reported data to EARSS since 2002 so far. Though the number of participating laboratories increased progressively from 12 to 35, the number of hospitals which reported for EARSS. as the number of strains included in the data base remained steady and relatively low. This issue is related to the particular position of Romania in the European context, in respect of the very low number of blood cultures performed in hospitals. Our paper is presenting the trends of antimicrobial resistance in the indicator strains in the 2002-2008 interval. During the 2002-2008 interval, Romania reported to EARSS a total number of 1276 bacterial strains, distributed by species as follows: 513 S aureus, 369 E. coli, 128 Streptococcus pneumoniae, 127 Enterococcus spp.. 71 Klebsiella pneumoniae, 68 Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were reported, according to the EARSS protocol, only for the 2005-2008 interval. It is difficult to describe trends, specially in Enterococcus, Streptococcus pneumonaie and the 2 species collected only since 2005, because of the low number of isolates, but there are several results that are supporting us to claim that antimicrobial resistance in invasive isolates is a real problem in Romanian hospitals, like in other Central, Southern and South Eastern European countries: more than 25% of S. aureus strains resistant to methicilline, with more than 50% in some years, high aminoglycozides resistance in more than 70-80% of Enterococcus faecium invasive strains, more than 80% of strains resistant to 3rd generation cephalosporines etc.