BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: New antileishmanials from natural products are urgently needed due to the emergence of drug resistance complicated by severe cytotoxic effects. 16alpha-Hydroxycleroda-3,13 (14)Z-dien-15,16-olide (Compound 1) from Polyalthia longifolia was found to be a potential antileishmanial and non-cytotoxic, as evidenced by long-term survival (>6 months) of treated animals. This prompted us to determine its target and, using molecular modelling, identify the interactions responsible for its specific antileishmanial activity. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: In vitro activity of compound was assessed using intracellular transgenic green fluorescent protein-stably expressed Leishmania donovani parasites. In vivo activity and survival of animals post-treatment were evaluated in L. donovani-infected hamsters. Known property of clerodane diterpenes as potent human DNA topoisomerase inhibitors led us to evaluate the inhibition of recombinant L. donovani topoisomerase I using relaxation assay. Mode of cell death induced by Compound 1 was assessed by phosphotidylserine exposure post-treatment. Molecular modelling studies were conducted with DNA topoisomerase I to identify the binding interactions responsible for its activity. KEY RESULTS: Bioassay-guided fractionation led to isolation of Compound 1 as a non-cytotoxic, orally active antileishmanial. Compound 1 inhibited recombinant DNA topoisomerase I which, ultimately, induced apoptosis. Molecular docking studies indicated that five strong hydrogen-bonding interactions and hydrophobic interactions of Compound 1 with L. donovani DNA-topoisomerase are responsible for its antileishmanial activity. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The data reveal Compound 1 is a potent and safe antileishmanial. The study further exploited the structural determinants responsible for its non-cytotoxic and potent activity, to raise the feasibility of specifically targeting the target enzyme responsible for its activity through rational drug design.