BACKGROUND: Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) is presently recommended by the World Health Organization as first-line treatment for uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in several countries, as a mean of prolonging the effectiveness of first-line malaria treatment regimens. A three-day course of artesunate-mefloquine (4 mg/kg body weight once daily for three consecutive days, plus 15 and 10 mg/kg body weight mefloquine on the first and second days) has been adopted by Malaria Control Programme of Thailand as first-line treatment for uncomplicated falciparum malaria all over the country since 2008. The gametocytocydal anti-malarial drug primaquine is administered at the dose of 30 mg (0.6 mg/kg) on the last day. The aim of the present study was to assess patient compliance of this combination regimen when applied to field condition. METHODS: A total of 240 patients (196 males and 44 females) who were attending the malaria clinics in Mae-Sot, Tak Province and presenting with symptomatic acute uncomplicated falciparum malaria, with no reappearance of Plasmodium vivax parasitaemia during follow-up were included into the study. The first dose of the treatment was given to the patients under direct supervision. All patients were given the medication for self-treatment at home and were requested to come back for follow-up on day 3 of the initial treatment. Baseline (day 0) and day 3 whole blood mefloquine and plasma primaquine concentrations were determined by high performance liquid chromatography. RESULTS: Two patients had recrudescence on days 28 and 35. The Kaplan-Meier estimate of the 42-day efficacy rate of this combination regimen was 99.2% (238/240). Based on whole blood mefloquine and plasma primaquine concentrations on day 3 of the initial treatment, compliance with mefloquine and primaquine in this three-day artesunate-mefloquine combination regimen were 96.3% (207/215), and 98.5% (197/200), respectively. Baseline mefloquine and primaquine levels were observed in 24 and 16% of the patients. CONCLUSION: The current first-line treatment and a three-day combination regimen of artesunate-mefloquine provides excellent patient compliance with good efficacy and tolerability in the treatment of highly multidrug resistance falciparum malaria. Previous treatment with mefloquine and primaquine were common in this area.