This study investigated the effect of photodynamic antimicrobial chemotherapy (PACT) using extracts from Alternanthera maritima on the viability of Candida dubliniensis. Human infections constitute a great health problem. Several antifungal drugs are currently available, but their uses are limited by a number of factors, such as low potency, poor solubility, microbial resistance, and drug toxicity. Therefore, the search for new and more effective antimicrobial agents and the development of alternative therapies, such as PACT, are necessary. Crude hexane and ethanol extracts of A. maritima were produced. The prepared extracts presented absorption at 650-700 nm. For bioassays, 50 microL of culture medium, 50 microL of extract (25 mg/mL) or control, and 5 microL of a suspension of the microorganism to be tested (C. dubliniensis ATCC 778157 or ATCC 777, 10(7)CFU/mL) were placed in a sterile 96-well microtiter plate (well cross section=0.38 cm(2)). The contents of each well were irradiated with a 685-nm diode laser with an output power of 35 mW, which was distributed through the well cross section yielding an energy dosage of 28 J/cm(2). In each assay (n=6), one plate was subjected to irradiation, and one was not. For each active sample, the number of colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) was obtained, and data were analyzed by the Tukey test. The chemical compositions of the extracts were determined by chromatographic and spectroscopic techniques. The results suggest inhibition of the growth of C. dubliniensis when irradiated with a diode laser in the presence of hexane and ethanol extracts from A. maritima as photosensitizers. Laser irradiation alone or crude extracts at 25mg/mL did not significantly reduce the number of CFU/mL. Steroids, triterpenes, and flavonoids were identified in the analyzed extracts. In conclusion, the photoactivation of crude hexane and ethanol extracts of A. maritima by red laser radiation at 685 nm promoted an antimicrobial effect, showing that these natural products can be used as photosensitizers in PACT.