During 2005-2008, a longitudinal study was conducted in southern Japan to detect and characterize multidrug-resistant Salmonella enterica serovars recovered from cattle diagnostic specimens. Determination of antimicrobial resistance phenotypes and genotypes, identification of Salmonella genomic island 1 (SGI1), detection of virulence genes, plasmid analysis, conjugal transfer experiments, and sequencing of class 1 integrons were conducted. Multidrug-resistant Salmonella detected were serovars Stanley, Typhimurium, and O4:d. Salmonella Stanley isolates exhibited resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole, oxytetracycline, trimethoprim, and kanamycin (ACSSuT+) encoded by bla(TEM), catA, aadA2, tetA, sul1, dfrA12, and aphA1 genes, respectively. Sequencing analysis revealed that aadA2 and dfrA12 were integrated as gene cassettes within the class 1 integrons of 1.5kb size. Importantly, the isolates harboured easily transferable plasmids of ca. 210kb with the potential of transmitting resistance phenotype and genotype detected in the donor isolates. Moreover, Salmonella Typhimurium DT104 isolates with typical SGI1 were detected and presented ACSSuT+ resistance phenotype encoded by bla(PSE-1) and bla(TEM); floR; aadA1; sul1; and tetA and tetG, respectively. Salmonella Typhimurium isolates carried plasmids of variable sizes ranging from 3.5 to 100 kb with DT104 isolates harbouring plasmids of ca. 90 kb. Salmonella serovar O4:d had ACSSuT+ resistance phenotype mediated by bla(TEM), catA, aadA1, sul1, tetA, and aphA1 genes. A virulence gene invA was found in all multidrug-resistant Salmonella Typhimurium, Stanley and O4:d clinical isolates. In conclusion, this is the first report describing the occurrence of multidrug-resistant Salmonella Stanley from bovine species. The emergence of Salmonella Stanley isolates exhibiting plasmid-encoded high-level multidrug resistance is an important health concern because this new pathogenecity was associated with mortality in cattle.