Previous studies have sought to determine the risk factors associated with candidemia caused by non-albicans Candida spp. or with potentially fluconazole-resistant Candida spp. (C. glabrata and C. krusei). Non-albicans Candida strains are a heterogeneous group that includes species with different levels of virulence, and only a limited number of C. glabrata isolates are resistant to fluconazole. We set out to identify the risk factors associated with microbiologically proven fluconazole-resistant candidemia. A prospective study including adult patients with candidemia was performed. Data were collected on patient demographics; underlying diseases; exposure to corticosteroids, antibiotics, or fluconazole; and invasive procedures. Risk factors associated either with non-albicans Candida spp. or potentially fluconazole-resistant Candida spp. (C. glabrata or C. krusei) or with Candida spp. with microbiologically confirmed fluconazole resistance were assessed using logistic regressions. We included 226 candidemia episodes. Non-albicans Candida isolates accounted for 53.1% of the fungal isolates, but only 18.2% of the cases were caused by potentially fluconazole-resistant organisms. Thirty isolates exhibited microbiologically confirmed fluconazole resistance. The multivariate analysis revealed that independent predictors associated with fluconazole-resistant Candida spp. were neutropenia (odds ratio [OR]=4.94; 95% confidence interval [CI]=1.50 to 16.20; P=0.008), chronic renal disease (OR=4.82; 95% CI=1.47 to 15.88; P=0.01), and previous fluconazole exposure (OR=5.09; 95% CI=1.66 to 15.6; P=0.004). Independently significant variables associated with non-albicans Candida bloodstream infection or with potentially fluconazole-resistant Candida spp. did not include previous fluconazole exposure. We concluded that prior fluconazole treatment is an independent risk factor only for candidemia caused by microbiologically confirmed fluconazole resistant species. Our findings may be of value for selecting empirical antifungal therapy.