The study of the antiviral activity of Russian anti-influenza agents in the cultured MDCK cells demonstrated that arbidol and ribavirin inhibited the reproduction of various influenza A virus strains, including rimantadine- and ozeltamivir-resistant variants, as well as influenza B viruses (IC50 2-8.5 microg/ml). Rimantadine at concentrations of 1-5 microg/ml completely inhibited the reproduction of reference and ozeltamivir-resistant influenza A virus strains, and it had no effect on the reproduction of influenza B viruses and rimantadine-resistant influenza A viruses. Arbidol and ribavirin also inhibited the reproduction of pandemic influenza A/California/04/2009(H1N1), A/California/07/2009(H1N1), and A/Moscow/01/2009(H1N1)swl viruses in the cultured MDCK cells (IC50 = 1.5-4.0 microg/ml) while rimantadine had no effect on their reproduction. The cultured cells showed no significant antiviral activity of ingavirin at nontoxic concentrations (up to 200 microg/ml) against all study strains of influenza A and B viruses, including pandemic A(H1N1) influenza virus strains. The activity of rimantadine, arbidol, and ingavirin was found on a model of Influenza pneumonia in mice infected with their adopted influenza A/Aichi/2/69(H3N2) virus. The preventive efficacy of the three test agents was similar and most pronounced when they were used 96 hours before infection, by preventing 40-50% death in the animals and their body weight loss and by increasing their survival by 1.3-1.5 times. Arbidol and rimantadine were more effective when used for treatment and prophylaxis in doses of 30 and 10 mg/kg/day, respectively, by protecting the infected animals from 60-80% death, increasing their survival by 1.7-2 times, and preventing their body weight loss as compared with the control. The same experiments with ingavirin showed that this agent was less effective than arbidol and rimantadine. Thus, arbidol and rimantadine have a pronounced antiviral infection in both cell culture and a model of influenza pneumonia. The found efficacy of ingavirin on an integral model of murine influenza pneumonia without its activity in the cultured cells is likely to be due to other pharmacological properties of the drug rather than its direct virus-specific action.