Antibacterial resistance is generally regarded as a public health problem, not only in local terms, but also worldwide. The objective of this research work would be to analyze inpatient's and outpatient's antimicrobial resistance to a set of various agents. The patients have been medically treated in the region of Ze-do canton since 2005 until today. Total number of 164 patients was included in our research. Regarding the place of medical treatment, our patients were divided into two groups: a total number of 111 inpatients and a total number of 53 outpatients. 56 of them were males, rest females. Apart from the sex affiliation, the exeminees were divided into two groups, depending on the presence of the Foley's catheter (inpatients only). We were obliged to determine the antimicrobial sensitivity of the isolated bacteria to certain representatives of antimicrobials. During the conducted testing, it has been proved that the phenomenon of polymicrobic infection found while testing inpatients is in immediate correlation to the catheterization. The inpatients urine tract infections are duo to the most commonest agent--E. coli that is in terms of percentage 38.5%, followed closely by Proteus spp.--19.3%, Pseudomonas spp.--13.6%, Klebsiella pneumoniae, 12.5%, et cetera. The outpatients urine tract infections are due to the most common agent E. coli percentage is 81%, as well as to Klebsiella pneumoniae, 19.0%. During the testing of the antimicrobial sensitivity of the isolated bacteria, it has been determined that the urine tract infection agents (starting with E. coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae) isolated from the inpatients urine specimens are proved to have higher resistance to tested antimicrobials compared to the same agents isolated from the outpatient's urine specimens. The differences refferring to resistance rates are ranging from 0.2% (trimetoprim-sulphametoksazol) to 25.9% (cephazolin) for E. coli, since the difference refferring resistance to Klebsiella pneumoniae is more noticeable and ranging from 0.8% (amoxicillin- clavulonic acid) to 65.0% (gentamicin).