The objective was to determine the effectiveness of various antimicrobial agents added to semen extender for inactivation of B. ovis or A. seminis in ovine semen after cryopreservation. In Experiment 1, 20 ejaculates from a crossbred ram infected with B. ovis were cryopreserved in Tris-based extenders with various antimicrobial agents: (I) control without antibiotics, (II) with penicillin and streptomycin (1000 IU/mL and 1 mg/mL, respectively), (III) lincomycin (0.15 mg/mL), (IV) sulphadiazine (0.60 mg/mL), and (V) gentamicin sulphate (0.25 mg/mL). Semen was stored in 0.25 mL straws at a final concentration of 150 x 10(6) spermatozoa/mL. After thawing (37 degrees C for 30 s), sperm total motility (TM), sperm morphology, integrity of sperm membranes, and bacterial growth were assessed. In Experiment 2, six B. ovis isolates were separately inoculated into aliquots of a fresh ejaculate from a B. ovis-free ram. Mock inoculated semen was processed for cryopreservation using the five extenders described above, and bacteriologically evaluated after thawing. In Experiment 3, sensitivity of A. seminis to the same antimicrobial agents was evaluated by inoculating an ejaculate from an A. seminis and B. ovis-free ram. There were no significant differences among treatments in post-thawing sperm parameters. B. ovis was isolated from 100% (20/20), 0% (0/20), 95% (19/20), 100% (20/20), and 5% (1/20) of semen samples diluted in tris-based extender of untreated (I) and treated semen samples with antimicrobial agents II, III, IV, and V, respectively. Frequencies of isolation from samples treated with antimicrobial agent II and V were significantly lower than untreated ones (P < 0.05). There were no significant differences in the profile of antimicrobial resistance of different B. ovis isolates. A. seminis had a similar sensitivity to the antimicrobial agents. We concluded that addition of a combination of penicillin and streptomycin or gentamicin alone to ram semen cryo-extenders inactivated B. ovis and A. seminis.