Summary. The development of the Guidelines for perioperative prophylactic use of antimicrobial agents (further on Guidelines) was initiated by the Interdisciplinary Section for Antibiotic Resistance Control (ISKRA) of the Croatian Ministry of Health and Social Welfare in accordance with the principles of AGREE (Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation) methodology which means that the guidelines are the result of a consensus between all involved professional societies. Guidelines were composed in order to improve antibiotic use in surgical professions. Data obtained from observational studies have shown that the use of antimicrobials in surgical professions is unsatisfactory, and since around 50% of all prescribed drugs in surgical professions refer to perioperative prophylaxis, such guidelines could significantly improve current negative trend and reduce the occurrence of infections in surgical patients as well as slow down the selection of resistant bacteria. In the introductory part of the guidelines, principles of perioperative prophylaxis are presented. The advantages and risks of prophylaxis are listed as well as factors that determine prophylaxis effectiveness. For easier orientation, surgical professions have been divided into basic surgical fields. In each field, the specificity of the field has been described followed by uniform structured tables and with every listed surgical procedure there is the most probable cause of infection, the drug of choice for prophylaxis, alternative drug, remark for particular surgical procedure and finally the grade of recommendation. The Guidelines do not cover perioperative prophylaxis in immunocompromised patients nor perioperative prophylaxis in children. The Guidelines do not cover all possible surgical interventions, but can be used as a basis for most surgical procedures performed in our hospitals. At the very end of these Guidelines, a comprehensive list of references enables all those interested to find further information and details about this topic. The revision of the Guidelines is planned in three years' time.