OBJECTIVES: Up-regulated matrix metalloproteinases may be involved in the development of cardiomyocyte injury and the degradation of troponin associated with acute pulmonary thromboembolism. We examined whether pretreatment with doxycycline (a nonspecific matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor) protects against cardiomyocyte injury associated with acute pulmonary thromboembolism. DESIGN: Controlled animal study. SETTING: University research laboratory. SUBJECTS: Mongrel dogs. INTERVENTIONS: Anesthetized animals received doxycycline (10 mg/kg intravenously) or saline and acute pulmonary thromboembolism was induced with autologous blood clots injected into the right atrium. Control animals received doxycycline (or saline). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Hemodynamic measurements were performed, and acute pulmonary thromboembolism increased baseline mean pulmonary arterial pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance by approximately 160% and 362%, respectively (both p < .05), 120 mins after acute pulmonary thromboembolism. Pretreatment with doxycycline attenuated these increases (to 125% and 232%, respectively; both p < .05). Although acute pulmonary thromboembolism tended to increase the right ventricle maximum rate of isovolumic pressure development and the maximum rate of isovolumic pressure decay, doxycycline produced no effects on these parameters. Gelatin zymograms of right ventricle showed that acute pulmonary thromboembolism marginally increased matrix metalloproteinase-9 (but not matrix metalloproteinase-2) levels in the right ventricle. A fluorometric assay to assess net matrix metalloproteinase activities showed that acute pulmonary thromboembolism increased matrix metalloproteinase activities in the right ventricle by >100% (p < .05), and this finding was confirmed by in situ zymography of the right ventricle. Doxycycline attenuated acute pulmonary thromboembolism-induced increases in right ventricle matrix metalloproteinase activities. Acute pulmonary thromboembolism induced neutrophil accumulation in the right ventricle, as estimated by myeloperoxidase activity, and doxycycline blunted this effect (p < .05). Serum cardiac troponin I concentrations, which reflect cardiomyocyte injury, increased after acute pulmonary thromboembolism, and this increase was attenuated by pretreatment with doxycycline (p < .05). CONCLUSIONS: We found evidence supporting the idea that acute pulmonary thromboembolism is associated with increased matrix metalloproteinase activities in the right ventricle, which may lead to degradation of sarcomeric proteins, including cardiac troponin I. Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases may be an effective therapeutic intervention in the management of acute pulmonary thromboembolism.