Bacteria isolated from infections in abdominal surgery during the period from April 2008 to March 2009 were investigated in a multicenter study in Japan, and the following results were obtained. In this series, 712 strains including 18 strains of Candida spp. were isolated from 173 (80.5%) of 215 patients with surgical infections. Three hundred and sixty-six strains were isolated from primary infections, and 346 strains were isolated from postoperative infections. From primary infections, anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria were predominant, followed by aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, while from postoperative infections aerobic Gram-positive bacteria were predominant, followed by anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria. Among aerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Enterococcus spp. was highest, followed by Streptococcus spp., and Staphylococcus spp. in this order, from primary infections, while Enterococcus spp. was highest, followed by Staphylococcus spp. from postoperative infections. Among aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Escherichia coli was the most predominantly isolated from primary infections, followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, in this order, and from postoperative infections, P aeruginosa was most predominantly isolated, followed by E. coli, Enterobacter cloacae, and K. pneumoniae. Among anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Eggerthella lenta was the highest from primary infections, followed by Parvimonas micra, Streptococcus constellatus and Gemella morbillorum, and from postoperative infections, E. lenta was most predominantly isolated. Among anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, the isolation rate of Bacteroides fragilis was the highest from primary infections, followed by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Bacteroides ovatus and Bilophila wadsworthia, and from postoperative infections, B. fragilis was most predominantly isolated, followed by B. thetaiotaomicron, B. wadsworthia and B. ovatus, in this order. In this series, we noticed no vancomycin-resistant methicillin-resistant S. aureus, and Enterococcus spp., nor multidrug-resistant P aeruginosa. We should carefully follow up B. wadsworthia which was resistant to various antibiotics, and also Bacteroides spp. which was resistant to many beta-lactam antibiotics.