BACKGROUND: Hypertriglyceridemia associated with low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels and hypercholesterolemia is the most common metabolic disorder among human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients using antiretroviral therapy. This atherogenic profile is associated with increased cardiovascular risk among these patients. Apolipoprotein B (apoB) is a better parameter than low-density lipoprotein (LDL) for evaluating lipids and cardiovascular risk among patients with diabetes and metabolic syndrome, but studies of apoB among HIV-infected patients are scarce. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted to estimate hyperapolipoprotein B (hyperapoB) prevalence and its association with other factors among HIV-infected patients attended in Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil. RESULTS: The prevalence of hyperapoB was 32.4% among 256 patients (62.1% male), with 90 mg/dL as the cutoff point. It was associated with prolonged use (>3 years) of antiretroviral therapy [odds ratio (OR), 3.63; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.24-10.6], hypertriglyceridemia (OR, 2.45; 95% CI, 1.22-4.91), insulin resistance according to homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) (OR, 2.12; 95% CI, 1.03-4.35), past history of diabetes (OR, 3.58; 95% CI, 1.0-12.7), and hypertension (OR, 1.98; 95% CI, 0.92-4.28). It was not associated with low HDL levels or self-report lipodystrophy. ApoB was higher in patients with metabolic syndrome according to the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) criteria and in those with higher Framingham scores. CONCLUSIONS: ApoB is a good parameter for evaluating lipid levels in HIV-infected patients with hypertriglyceridemia, among whom LDL measurements may not be appropriate. ApoB might be useful for diagnosing and treating hypertriglyceridemia in this population. The association between hyperapoB and hypertriglyceridemia and diseases relating to insulin resistance among HIV-infected patients suggests that this group of patients presents higher cardiovascular risk.