UNLABELLED: This in vitro study assessed the fracture resistance of endodontically-treated teeth undergoing combination bleaching with 38% and 9.5% hydrogen peroxide gels as in-office and at-home bleaching techniques, respectively. In addition, the effect of an antioxidizing agent, sodium ascorbate, was investigated. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Sixty maxillary premolars were endodontically-treated, received a glass ionomer barrier as a mechanical seal and were embedded in acrylic resin up to the cemento-enamel junction. The specimens were divided into four groups (n = 15) as follows: G I: no bleaching, access cavity restored with resin composite (negative control); G II: bleached for three weeks daily using 9.5% hydrogen peroxide for two hours and three sessions of in-office bleaching using 38% hydrogen peroxide every seven days, then restored (positive control); G III: bleached similar to G II and restored after one week; G IV: bleached similar to G II, along with the use of an antioxidizing agent for 24 hours, then restored. In each in-office and at-home bleaching session, the whitening gels were applied to the buccal surface of the tooth and placed inside the pulp chamber (inside/outside bleaching technique). Finally, the specimens underwent fracture resistance testing; the data were analyzed using ANOVA and Scheffe's test (alpha = 0.05). RESULTS: Significant differences were observed among the study groups (p < 0.05). Groups I and II demonstrated the highest and lowest fracture resistance, respectively. The samples that were not bleached (Group I) and the 10% sodium ascorbate gel group (Group IV) demonstrated significantly higher fracture resistance than the positive control group (p < 0.05). No significant differences were found between Groups III and II (p > 0.05). CONCLUSION: Within the limitations of the current study, it can be concluded that the fracture resistance of endodontically-treated teeth decreases after combination bleaching. The use of sodium ascorbate can reverse decreased fracture resistance.