PURPOSE: To explore the effect of a novel multipurpose contact lens solution (MPS) on the junction protein distribution and barrier function of cultured human corneal epithelial cell monolayers. METHODS: Cultured human corneal epithelial cells (HCEpiC) were exposed to a novel MPS (MPS A; Biotrue multi-purpose solution, Bausch & Lomb Incorporated) at 50%, 75% and 100% for 10 or 30 min. Four commercially available MPS products, MPS B (AQuify, Ciba Vision), MPS C (COMPLETE MPS Easy Rub, AMO), MPS D (OPTI-FREE Express, Alcon) and MPS E (OPTI-FREE RepleniSH, Alcon) were tested in parallel. Tight junction structure and integrity were evaluated by confocal microscopy using ZO-1 antibody and scanning microscopy (SEM). Quantitative evaluation of MPSs on epithelial barrier function was determined by measuring transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) across HCEpiC grown on Transwell Clear permeable supports and on electric cell-substrate impedance sensing (ECIS) electrode arrays. RESULTS: Overall after exposure to the three concentrations (50%, 75%, and 100%) of MPS A, ZO-1 distribution and fluorescent intensity on the cell surface appeared similar to the media control with continuous tight junctions and clear intercellular junctions. At all measured time points after exposure to MPS A (50% or 75%) there was also no effect on the TEER using both resistance methodologies, and SEM showed that MPS A appeared similar to the Hank's balanced salt solution (HBSS) control. In cells exposed to MPS D there was a dose-dependent change in the distribution of ZO-1, some cell detachment, and a decrease in monolayer resistance at all time points measured. Ultrastructurally, MPS D caused gross changes, including damage to cell junctions and plasma membranes. To a lesser extent, the remaining three commercial MPS products demonstrated some effects on tight junction ZO-1 distribution and/or TEER. CONCLUSIONS: Based on the in vitro measurements of tight junction protein expression, monolayer integrity, and transepithelial electrical resistance, the novel multipurpose contact lens solution (MPS A) did not alter corneal barrier function as compared to media, PBS or HBSS control. Clinical significance of the observed differences in epithelial barrier function among the MPSs tested needs further investigation.