Immunocompromised transplant recipients are at high risk for human cytomegalovirus (CMV)-related infection and disease. Antiviral prophylaxis and treatment have reduced CMV morbidity and mortality, but at times promote development of antiviral-resistant CMV strains that can significantly contribute to adverse clinical outcomes in transplant recipients. We have investigated CMV genotypes in transplant recipients (bone marrow, stem cell, kidney, heart, lung, and liver) receiving antiviral prophylaxis or preemptive therapy or treatment, to determine the viral characteristics and clinical impact of antiviral-resistant CMV in these different groups. Antiviral-resistant CMV strains were detected by polymerase chain reaction sequencing of the CMV protein kinase (UL97) and viral DNA polymerase (UL54) genes from clinical specimens. A trend toward more frequent detection of multidrug resistance and co-circulation of multiple resistant strains was seen in heart and lung transplant recipients compared with other transplantation types. A greater diversity and number of UL97 and UL54 mutations were observed in heart and lung transplant recipients; whereas antiviral-resistant CMV infections in other transplant recipients were predominantly the result of a single mutant genotype. Furthermore, 43% (6/14) of CMV-positive heart and lung transplant recipients were infected with CMV strains containing UL54 mutations conferring multidrug resistance compared with only 6% (1/18) of CMV-positive recipients of other transplanted organs or stem cells. Emergence of CMV strains containing previously unrecognized UL54 mutations (F412S and D485N) also occurred in 1 lung and 1 heart transplant recipient. The development of these mutations under antiviral selective pressure, and clinical outcome of infection suggests these mutations are likely to confer antiviral resistance. Emergence of CMV antiviral resistance remains a significant issue in immunocompromised patients treated with antiviral agents, and emphasizes the relevance of regular antiviral resistance testing when designing optimal patient-management strategies.