A sheep trial was performed to standardise a coproantigen reduction test (CRT) protocol for the diagnosis of resistance to triclabendazole (TCBZ) in Fasciola hepatica). The CRT employs the BIO K201 Fasciola coproantigen ELISA (Bio-X Diagnostics, Jemelle, Belgium) to test for the presence of F. hepatica coproantigens in a faecal sample. If it is coproantigen-positive, the CRT protocol recommends that faecal samples are re-tested for coproantigens at 14 days post-treatment (dpt), with negative testing at this point indicating TCBZ success. Initial work aimed to confirm the sensitivity of the BIO K201 ELISA for Fasciola infection and investigate whether coproantigens represent a robust reduction marker of TCBZ efficacy. Thirty-eight, indoor-reared sheep were artificially infected with F. hepatica isolates known to be susceptible (Cullompton) and resistant (Sligo) to TCBZ action, respectively. Treatment was administered at 12 weeks post-infection (wpi), with 2 sheep groups, infected with each isolate, culled at 2 and 4 weeks post-treatment (wpt), respectively. Necropsy was performed to confirm treatment efficacy. Individual faecal samples were collected twice-weekly throughout the trial period. Additional work focused on the effect of temperature on faecal sample collection and storage. Faecal samples collected from sheep positive for F. hepatica infection were sub-sampled and left at room temperature. Individual sub-samples were tested by ELISA on consecutive days and these readings compared to the original test result on the day of collection. In addition, ELISA values were compared between faecal sub-samples prepared on the day of sampling and post storage at -20 degrees C. Also, an immunocytochemical study was performed to determine the tissue site of origin of the coproantigen protein in the fluke. Results showed that the BIO K201 ELISA was sensitive for Fasciola coproantigens, with coproantigens detectable from 5 wpi onwards. The suitability of coproantigens as a diagnostic marker of TCBZ efficacy was supported by the absence and presence of coproantigens in TCBZ-treated Cullompton (TCBZ-susceptible) and Sligo (TCBZ-resistant) F. hepatica infections at 2 and 4 wpt, respectively. Study results suggest that low to moderate temperature has little, if any, impact on coproantigen stability in faecal samples, but that higher temperatures may have. Immunolabelling for the coproantigen showed that it was specific to the gastrodermal cells of both adult and juvenile flukes.