Salmonella enterica serotype Choleraesuis (S. Choleraesuis) usually causes systemic infections in man and needs antimicrobial treatment. Multidrug resistance (MDR) in S. Choleraesuis is thus a great concern in the treatment of systemic non-typhoid salmonellosis. A large plasmid, pSC138, was identified in 2002 from a S. Choleraesuis strain SC-B67 that was resistant to all antimicrobial agents commonly used to treat salmonellosis, including ciprofloxacin and ceftriaxone. Complete DNA sequence of the plasmid had been determined previously (Chiu et al., 2005). In the present study, the sequence of pSC138 was reannotated in detail and compared with several newly sequenced plasmids. Some transposable elements and drug resistance genes were further delineated. Plasmid pSC138 was 138,742 bp in length and consisted of 177 open reading frames (ORFs). While 134 of the ORFs displayed significant identity levels to other plasmid and prokaryotic sequences, the remaining 43 ORFs have not been previously reported. Mobile elements, including two integrons, seven insertion sequences and eight transposons, and a truncated prophage together encompass at least 66,781 bp (48.1%) of the plasmid genome. The sequence of pSC138 consists of three major regions: a large composite transposable region Tn6088 with a Tn21-like backbone inserted by a variety of integrons or transposable elements; a transfer/maintenance region that contains a conserved ISEcp1-mediated transposon-like element Tn6092, carrying an AmpC gene, bla(CMY-2), that confers the ceftriaxone resistance; and a Rep_3 type of replication region. Another seven bacteremic strains of S. Choleraesuis that expressed the same MDR phenotype were identified during 2003-2008. The same Rep_3 type replicase and the bla(CMY-2)-containing, ISEcp1-mediated transposon-like element were found in the MDR isolates, suggesting a successful preservation and dissemination of the MDR plasmid. Comparison of pSC138 with other recently published plasmids revealed a high identity level between partial sequences of pSC138 and plasmids of the same or different incompatibility groups. The large MDR region found in pSC138 may provide a niche for the future evolution of the plasmid by acquisition of relevant resistance genes through the panoply of mobile elements and illegitimate recombination events.