OBJECTIVES: Ciprofloxacin is the most frequently used member of the fluoroquinolones during initial eradication therapy of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, as well as during acute pulmonary exacerbations. However, its long-term effect on the susceptibility of the commensal flora within the cystic fibrosis (CF) airways has not yet been examined. The aim of this study was therefore to examine the consequence of oral ciprofloxacin usage on the resistance of the commensal viridans group streptococci (VGS), in terms of MICs and mutational analysis of the quinolone resistance-determining regions (QRDRs). METHODS: The MICs of ciprofloxacin, efflux activities and amino acid substitutions in the QRDRs for 190 isolates of VGS, originating from the sputa of adult CF patients who had been exposed constantly to ciprofloxacin, were examined. VGS organisms included Streptococcus salivarius, Streptococcus mitis, Streptococcus sanguinis, Streptococcus oralis, Streptococcus parasanguinis, Streptococcus infantis, Streptococcus gordonii, Streptococcus anginosus, Streptococcus cristatus, Streptococcus australis and Streptococcus mutans. Ciprofloxacin susceptibility was determined by broth microdilution and QRDRs within the gyrA, gyrB, parC and parE gene loci were explored using sequence analysis. RESULTS: Twenty-seven (14.2%) streptococcal isolates were resistant to ciprofloxacin (MICs >/=8 mg/L) and 21 (11.1%) had reduced susceptibility (MICs 4 mg/L). As a comparator, clinically non-significant and non-invasive VGS organisms were examined in 12 consecutive non-CF patients in the community, where no resistance to ciprofloxacin was observed. Five novel QRDR PCR assays were developed to elucidate mutations within the CF VGS population, where there were six positions, which corresponded to previously reported quinolone resistance responsible mutations, and eight novel potential QRDR resistance mutations. Double mutations in gyrA and parC/parE led to MICs of 16 to >64 mg/L, while single mutations in parC or parE resulted in MICs of 8-32 mg/L and 8 mg/L, respectively. The mean homologies of each species to Streptococcus pneumoniae R6 were: gyrA, 70.3%-95%; gyrB, 69.6%-96.2%; parC, 76.1%-94.8%; and parE, 70.7%-94.7%. The close relatives of S. pneumoniae, S. mitis and S. oralis, showed high similarity for all four genes (more than 86%). CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of P. aeruginosa with oral ciprofloxacin in patients with CF may concurrently reduce antibiotic susceptibility in the commensal VGS flora, where these organisms may potentially act as a reservoir of fluoroquinolone resistance gene determinants for newly acquired and antibiotic-susceptible pathogens, particularly the Streptococcus milleri group.