The effects of different ages and dosages on the plasma disposition and hair concentration profile of ivermectin following pour-on administration in goats. J. vet. Pharmacol. Therap.34, 70-75. The effects of different ages and dosages on the plasma disposition and hair degradation of ivermectin (IVM) were investigated following pour-on administration in goats. Twenty-eight female Saanen goats allocated into two groups of 14 animals according to their ages as young (5-6 months old) and old (12-24 months old) groups. Each age group was divided into two further of seven goats and administered pour-on formulation of IVM topically at the in recommended dosage rate of 0.5 mg/kg bodyweight The recommended cattle dosages rate of 0.5 mg/kg or at the higher dosage of 1.0 mg/kg. Blood samples were collected at various times between 1 h and 40 days. In addition, hair samples (>0.01 g) were collected using tweezers from the application sites and far from application sites of the all animals throughout the blood sampling period. The plasma and hair samples were analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using fluorescence detection following solid and liquid phase extractions, respectively. Dose- and age-dependent plasma disposition of IVM were observed in goats after pour-on administration. In addition, relatively high concentration and slow degradation of IVM in hair samples collected from the application site and far from the application site were observed in the present study. The differences between young and old goats are probably related to differences in body condition and/or lengths of haircoat. The systemic availability of IVM following pour-on administration is relatively much lower than after oral and subcutaneous administrations but the plasma persistence was prolonged. Although, the longer persistence of IVM on hairs on the application site may prolong of efficacy against ectoparasites, the poor plasma availability could result in subtherapeutic plasma concentrations, which may confer the risk of resistance development in for internal parasites after pour-on administration in goats.