The influence of light of varying wavelength on growth and ochratoxin A biosynthesis of Aspergillus carbonarius, A. niger, A. steynii and on Penicillium nordicum and P. verrucosum was analysed. For comparison the influence of light on various other food relevant fungi, including citrinin producers, was also tested. Generally the Aspergilli seem to be more resistant to light treatment than the Penicillia. Interestingly wavelengths from both sides of the spectrum, e. g. red (long wavelength, 627 nm) and blue (short wavelength 470-455 nm) had the strongest inhibitory effects on growth and ochratoxin A biosynthesis. Blue light generally had a stronger effect. Light of moderate wavelength, 590 to 530 nm, (yellow to green) had more a positive than a negative influence on growth or ochratoxin A biosynthesis compared to the control (dark incubation). The light effect on growth and ochratoxin A biosynthesis was dependent on the growth medium. In contrast to malt extract medium (MEA), YES medium, as an especially nutrient rich medium, had an attenuating effect on the reactivity against light. However the tendency of the response in both media was the same. Moreover, the light intensity strongly influences how the fungus reacts. Depending on the intensity and the resistance of the species a complete cessation of growth and/or inhibition of ochratoxin A biosynthesis could be achieved. Light irradiation has the opposite effect on ochratoxin A than citrinin, two mycotoxins which can be produced simultaneously in P. verrucosum. Citrinin was produced essentially under light conditions which inhibited ochratoxin A biosynthesis. The same was true for a derivative of ochratoxin, in particular a derivative of ochratoxin beta in A. carbonarius. A. carbonarius produced high amounts of the ochratoxin beta derivative under blue light when the production of ochratoxin A was ceased at the most inhibiting conditions used (MEA, royal blue light, 455 nm, 1700 lx). Light has a growth stalling but not inactivating effect on aerial mycelia. If a non-growing colony under light is shifted to the dark it immediately grows normally. However on spores blue light has a deactivating effect. After incubation of spores of P. verrucosum for 24h under blue light up to 97% of the spores were no longer able to germinate. Again the spores of the Aspergilli were much more resistant.