Our understanding of innate immunity within the equine respiratory tract is limited despite growing evidence for its key role in both the immediate defense and the shaping of downstream adaptive immune responses to respiratory disease. As the first interface to undergo pathogen invasion, the respiratory epithelium is a key player in these early events and our goal was to examine the innate immune characteristics of equine respiratory epithelia and compare them to an in vitro equine respiratory epithelial cell model cultured at the air-fluid interface (AFI). Respiratory epithelial tissues, isolated epithelial cells, and four-week old cultured differentiated airway epithelial cells collected from five locations of the equine respiratory tract were examined for the expression of toll-like receptors (TLRs) and host defense peptides (HDPs) using conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Cultured, differentiated, respiratory epithelial cells and freshly isolated respiratory epithelial cells were also examined for the expression of TLR3, TLR9 and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis. In addition, cytokine and chemokine profiles from respiratory epithelial tissues, freshly isolated respiratory epithelial cells, and cultured, differentiated, epithelial cells from the upper respiratory tract were examined using real-time PCR. We found that respiratory epithelial tissues and isolated epithelial cells expressed TLRs 1-4 and 6-10 as well as HDPs, MxA, 2'5' OAS, beta-defensin-1, and lactoferrin. In contrast, epithelial cells cultured at the AFI expressed TLRs 1-4 and 6 and 7 as well as MxA, 2'5' OAS, beta-defensin-1, but had lost expression of TLRs 8-10 and lactoferrin. In addition, MHC-I and MHC-II surface expression decreased in epithelial cells cultured at the AFI compared to isolated epithelial cells whereas TLR3 and TLR9 were expressed at similar levels. Lastly, we found that equine respiratory epithelial cells express an array of pro-inflammatory, antiviral and regulatory cytokines and that after four weeks of in vitro growth conditions, equine respiratory epithelial cells cultured at the AFI retained expression of GM-CSF, IL-10, IL-8, TGF-beta, TNF-alpha, and IL-6. In summary, we describe the development of an in vitro equine respiratory epithelial cell culture model that is morphologically similar to the equine airway epithelium and retains several key immunological properties. In the future this model will be a used to study equine respiratory viral pathogenesis and cell-to-cell interactions.