OBJECTIVE: To discuss treatment options that can be used for treatment of Acinetobac/erinfections. DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE search (1966-November 2010) was conducted to identify English-language literature on pharmacotherapy of Acinetobacter and the bibliographies of pertinent articles. Programs and abstracts from infectious diseases meetings were also searched. Search terms included Acinetobacter, multidrug resistance, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, Monte Carlo simulation, nosocomial pneumonia, carbapenems, polymyxins, sulbactam, aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, tigecycline, rifampin, and fluoroquinolones. DATA SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All articles were critically evaluated and all pertinent information was included in this review. DATA SYNTHESIS: Multidrug resistant (MDR) Acinetobacter, defined as resistance to 3 or more antimicrobial classes, has increased over the past decade. The incidence of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter is also increasing, leading to an increased use of dose optimization techniques and/or alternative antimicrobials, which is driven by local susceptibility patterns. However, Acinetobacter infections that are resistant to all commercially available antibiotics have been reported. General principles are available to guide dose optimization of aminoglycosides, beta-lactams, fluoroquinolones, and tigecycline for infections due to gram-negative pathogens. Unfortunately, data specific to patients with Acinetobacter infections are limited. Recent pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic information has shed light on colistin dosing. The dilemma with colistin is its concentration-dependent killing, which makes once-daily dosing seem like an attractive option, but its short postantibiotic effect limits a clinician's ability to extend the dosing interval. Localized delivery of antimicrobials is also an attractive option due to the ability to increase drug concentration at the infection site while minimizing systemic adverse events, but more data are needed regarding this approach. CONCLUSIONS: Increased reliance on dosage optimization, combination therapy, and localized delivery of antimicrobials are methods to pursue positive clinical outcomes in MDR Acinetobacter infections since novel antimicrobials will not be available for several years. Well-designed clinical trials with MDR Acinetobacter are needed to define the best treatment options for these patients.