The VITEK 2 automated system (bioMerieux) is one of the most widely used instruments in clinical microbiology laboratories for the identification and evaluation of the susceptibility profiles of bacteria including the detection of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) produced by Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Klebsiella oxytoca. Currently, the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute recommends the use of ESBL confirmatory tests in addition to standard susceptibility testing. In order to evaluate the accuracy of VITEK 2-positive results regarding clinical isolates of E. coli (n = 110) and K. pneumoniae (n = 72), four additional ESBL detection systems were compared: the Phoenix Automated Microbiology System (BD Diagnostic Systems) and the MicroScan WalkAway-96 System (Dade Behring), and two manual systems as confirmatory tests, the Etest (AB Biodisk) and double disc diffusion (DDS) test. Epidemiological data regarding the tested strains were also collected and their susceptibility phenotypes were determined. The four methods resulted in concordant results for 126 of the 182 strains. However, the different tests displayed distinct results: the VITEK 2 system was in disagreement in 23.9 % of cases with DDS, in 15.3 % with Etest, in 23 % with the MicroScan WalkAway-96 System and in 23.6 % with the Phoenix Automated Microbiology System. Epidemiological data indicated that the majority of ESBL-positive E. coli strains were isolated from patients admitted to internal medicine wards (72.7 %), whilst K. pneumoniae ESBL-positive isolates were equally distributed between internal medicine wards (45.8 %) and intensive care units (45.8 %). Most of these strains were isolated from urine. In contrast to ESBL-negative isolates, the ESBL-positive strains displayed multiple drug resistance, namely to quinolones, aminoglycosides and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. No significant resistance to carbapenems was detected. Overall, this study demonstrates the need for a confirmatory test following positive ESBL detection with the VITEK 2 system (panel AST-037), which appears to yield a large number of false-positive results.