Bacterial infections are the main cause of death within the first year after liver transplantation, and the increased incidence of multidrug-resistant gram-positive pathogens has created a major challenge in the treatment of these patients. Linezolid, the first US Food & Drug Administration-approved oxazolidinone, offers a valuable novel treatment option for serious gram-positive infections. Linezolid is relatively non-toxic but prolonged treatment with linezolid was associated with thrombocytopenia. Here we report on the experience of linezolid treatment in adult liver transplant patients, who are at an increased risk for thrombocytopenia because of hypersplenism. From November 2003 until December 2009, we evaluated the clinical course of 46 liver transplant patients (27 male/19 female) in our surgical intensive care unit. For proven or probable gram-positive infection, all patients received linezolid 600 mg intravenously every 12 h. On clinical improvement, treatment was changed to oral linezolid 600 mg twice daily. Treatment duration was 11 +/- 7 days. Treatment indications were pneumonia (n = 8), blood stream infection (n = 30), and surgical site/abdominal infection (n = 3). Clinical cure was achieved in 43 out of 46 patients. During the course of treatment, no cases of severe thrombocytopenia occurred and a statistically significant platelet count increase was seen from day 1 (110 +/- 73/nL) to day 7 (165 +/- 116/nL) and day 14 (180 +/- 140/nL). We did not observe any further adverse events, especially no severe neurological complications (e.g., serotonin syndrome) or signs of lactate acidosis. Two patients died from uncontrolled vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium sepsis with septic shock and one due to uncontrolled methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia. These deaths were considered to be unrelated to linezolid treatment, and linezolid was regarded as the optimal treatment choice in these patients. A subgroup analysis of patients treated for >14 days revealed no statistically significant differences when compared with patients on shorter treatment. In particular, no cases of thrombocytopenia occurred during longer treatment. In conclusion, linezolid is a safe and effective treatment for adult liver transplant patients with gram-positive infections.