OBJECTIVE: Stress stimuli such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) have been shown to induce insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 serine phosphorylation and insulin resistance by transactivation of ErbB receptors. We aimed at elucidating the potential role of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) in mediating stress-induced ErbB receptors activation. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: p38MAPK effect on ErbBs transactivation and insulin signaling was assessed in Fao or HepG2 cells, exposed to stress stimuli, and on metabolic parameters in ob/ob and C57/BL6 mice. RESULTS: High-fat diet-fed mice and ob/ob mice exhibited elevated hepatic p38MAPK activation associated with glucose intolerance and hyperinsulinemia. Liver expression of dominant-negative (DN)-p38MAPKalpha in ob/ob mice reduced fasting insulin levels and improved glucose tolerance, whereas C57/BL6 mice overexpressing wild-type p38MAPKalpha exhibited enhanced IRS-1 serine phosphorylation and reduced insulin-stimulated IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation. Fao or HepG2 cells exposed to TNF, anisomycin, or sphingomyelinase demonstrated rapid transactivation of ErbB receptors leading to PI3-kinase/Akt activation and IRS-1 serine phosphorylation. p38MAPK inhibition either by SB203580, by small interfering RNA, or by DN-p38MAPKalpha decreased ErbB receptors transactivation and IRS-1 serine phosphorylation and partially restored insulin-stimulated IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation. When cells were incubated with specific ErbB receptors antagonists or in cells lacking ErbB receptors, anisomycin- and TNF-induced IRS-1 serine phosphorylation was attenuated, despite intact p38MAPK activation. The stress-induced p38MAPK activation leading to ErbB receptors transactivation was associated with intracellular reactive oxygen species generation and was attenuated by treatment with antioxidants. CONCLUSIONS: Hepatic p38MAPK is activated following various stress stimuli. This event is upstream to ErbB receptors transactivation and plays an important role in stress-induced IRS-1 serine phosphorylation and insulin resistance.