INTRODUCTION: The discovery of antimicrobial drugs was a turning point in the permanent conflict between the mankind and microorganisms. However, due to the wide use and misuse of antibiotics in therapy and prophylaxis of infections the mankind is threatened by an alarming rise in the resistance of bacteria to drugs. Will this phenomenon turn us back to the pre-antibiotic era? DISCUSSION: The increasing resistance of bacteria has become a global public health problem: bacteria are showing a remarkable capacity to develop different mechanisms and avoid drug effect. Mechanisms of resistance are numerous and various: production of beta-lactamases (Ambler class A): TEM-I, TEM-2 and SHV-1 and mutants of classical enzymes with extended spectrum (ESBL) (e.g. in Klebsiella spp.) which results in the resistance to the 3rd generation cephalosporines and new metallo-beta-lactamases among Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter (resistance to carbapenems). The alteration of the target enzymes (PBP) leads to the Staphylococci resistance to methicillin and the responsible gene is mecA gene). The alteration of DNA gyrase due to the mutations of gyrA, gyrB, parC genes (accumulation of multiple mutations) results in the development of resistance to fluoroquinolones); and the active efflux system - "pumping out" of the drug from the bacterial cell leads to the resistance of a wide spectrum of different antibiotics. In order to choose the most efficient drug for therapy, it is necessary to investigate susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial agents. For that purpose, a disc-diffusion method according to CLSl standard procedure is performed. For invasive strains it is often necessary to determine minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of antimicrobials. The methods that are in use are agar-dilution methods, E-test and automated MIC determination by VITEK 2 system. CONCLUSION: By molecular-biological methods it is possible to identify the mechanisms of resistance and detect the specific genes behind it (mecA gene). The targeted therapy prevents compromising of antibiotics valuable in treatment of severe infections (carbapenems).