Bacillus cereus is an ever-present problem. It is widely distributed in several environments such as soil and plants and is commonly isolated from food and additives. In this study we analyzed 97 foodborne B. cereus sensu stricto strains isolated in Brazil in the 1980's, 1990's and 2000's in order to investigate the genetic diversity (assessed by Rep-PCR), antimicrobial resistance and toxigenic profiles (presence of hblA, hblC and hblD; nheA, nheB and nheC as well as cytK, ces and entFM genes) of such strains. The majority of the strains (79, 81.4%) were beta-hemolytic. The NHE complex was found in 82 strains (84.5%) and HBL complex was found in 61 (62.9%) strains. All strains were negative to ces. The cytK-2 gene was found in 44 (45.4%) strains. The predominant toxigenic pattern was type I (32, 33%) which included strains positive for all toxin genes but ces. Computer assisted cluster analysis of Rep-PCR profiles showed a high genetic diversity. Seven major clusters comprising two or more strains were found and cluster 1 was predominant (ten strains, nine of them showing 100% similarity). This cluster included strains isolated in the 1980's and the 1990's. Cluster analysis of Rep-PCR profiles based on decade of isolation, source, hemolytic pattern, toxigenic and antibiotic resistance patterns revealed a similar clustering pattern as found in the analysis including all strains. The inability to observe a predominant band pattern when Rep-PCR cluster analysis was based on decade of isolation suggests that this diversity has been maintained over time. All strains were susceptible to gentamicin. We detected resistance to tetracycline (11 strains showing intermediate resistance and nine completely resistant strains), clindamycin (ten intermediate strains) and vancomycin (one strain). Clindamycin resistance showed statistical association with strains isolated in 2000's. The predominant resistance pattern was type A (72, 72.2%) which included strains susceptible to all drugs tested. Our results suggest that the majority of the strains present in several types of food in Brazil pose a potential risk to cause food poisoning due to the high prevalence of toxin genes found in these strains. However, additional studies involving cytotoxicity tests and affiliation of these strains to phylogenetic groups based on molecular data would be useful to better evaluate this potential and could provide a more accurate indication of the risk.