Few antimicrobials are licensed for use in sheep in Canada, and the range of indications is narrow. Treatment in an "extra-label" manner may be ineffective. In addition, potentially harmful drug residues in food-animal products and antimicrobial resistance in bacteria may be associated with extra-label drug use (ELDU). No data had been documented on drug use, specifically antimicrobial use (AMU), in Ontario sheep, although it was thought that much use was extra-label. This study investigated AMU and ELDU on 49 lamb-producing Ontario sheep farms. Data were prospectively collected over 12 months from the participating farms, and farm-level practices were ascertained with a questionnaire. Treatment-level and farm-level variables were investigated for associations with rates of AMU by means of Poisson rate regression models fit with a generalized estimating equation to control for clustering at the farm level. Antimicrobials with high mean exposure rates included chlortetracycline (in feed), penicillins, and oxytetracycline. The exposure rate in lambs was significantly lower (P < 0.01) with antimicrobial treatment of systemic signs, respiratory disease, or wound or injury than with treatment of other reported diseases or conditions; it was also significantly lower with 3 or more lambing periods per year (alpha = 0.05). The exposure rate in adult sheep was significantly lower with treatment of 5 of the 6 most prevalent diseases or conditions (alpha = 0.05) and significantly higher with producer decision to treat and producer experience of 20 y or greater. Rates of using antimicrobials not licensed for use in sheep were high, as was extra-label use of licensed antimicrobials. Diseases reportedly treated most often with antimicrobials (e.g., systemic signs, mastitis) were significantly associated with lower rates of ELDU (alpha = 0.05). Compared with the rates in adult sheep, the mean rate of use of nonlicensed antimicrobials was similar in the lambs, whereas the mean rate of extra-label use of licensed antimicrobials was lower among the lambs. The results are useful in determining if public health concerns about antimicrobial use in Ontario sheep are warranted and in creating drug use and licensure strategies for the Canadian sheep industry.