PURPOSE: Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is among the most important viral pathogens affecting solid organ recipients. The direct effects of CMV (eg, infection and its sequela; tissue invasive disease) are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality. In addition, CMV is associated with numerous indirect effects, including immunomodulatory effects, acute and chronic rejection, and opportunistic infections. Due to the potentially devastating effects of CMV, transplant surgeons and physicians have been challenged to fully understand this infectious complication and find the best ways to prevent and treat it to ensure optimal patient outcomes. SUMMARY: Lung, heart, and heart-lung recipients are at considerably high risk of CMV infection. Both direct and indirect effects of CMV in these populations have potentially lethal consequences. The use of available treatment options depend on the level of risk of each patient population for CMV infection and disease. Those at the highest risk are CMV negative recipients of CMV positive organs (D+/R-), followed by D+/R+, and D-/R+. More than 1 guideline exists delineating prevention and treatment options for CMV, and new guidelines are being developed. It is hoped that new treatment algorithms will provide further guidance to the transplantation community. The first part describes the overall effects of CMV, both direct and indirect; risk factors for CMV infection and disease; methods of diagnosis; and currently available therapies for prevention and treatment. Part 2 similarly addresses antiviral-resistant CMV, summarizing incidence, risk factors, methods of diagnosis, and treatment options. Parts 3 and 4 present cases to illustrate issues surrounding CMV in heart and lung transplantation, respectively. Part 3 discusses the possible mechanisms by which CMV can cause damage to the coronary allograft and potential techniques of avoiding such damage, with emphasis on fostering strong CMV-specific immunity. Part 4 highlights the increased incidence of CMV infection and disease among lung transplant recipients and its detrimental effect on survival. The possible benefits of extended-duration anti-CMV prophylaxis are explored, as are those of combination prophylaxis with valganciclovir and CMVIG. CONCLUSION: Through improved utilization of information regarding optimized antiviral therapy for heart and lung transplant recipients to prevent and treat CMV infection and disease and through increased understanding of clinical strategies to assess, treat, and monitor patients at high risk for CMV recurrence and resistance, the health care team will be able to provide the coordinated effort needed to improve patient outcomes.