BACKGROUND: Critically ill children are at high risk for developing nosocomial infections that contributes to death in 4% of all pediatric intensive care unit admissions. This prospective study was undertaken to determine the prevalence of septicemia in the pediatric surgery department of a large tertiary care teaching hospital in Kuwait and to evaluate the risk factors, the microbial etiology, and the antimicrobial susceptibility pattern of the isolated microorganisms. METHODS: All patients admitted to the pediatric surgery department from January 2001 until December 2004 with the diagnosis of septicemia were included in the study, and the microbiologically proven cases were then analyzed. The patients' demographics and risk factors for sepsis were recorded. All positive blood cultures were subjected to identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing by VITEK 2(bioMerieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). RESULTS: Of 3408 patients suspected to have septicemia, 78 (2.3%) patients developed microbiologically documented septicemias, 26% of those were low-birth weight patients, and 82% were patients with congenital anomalies; 87% of those needed surgical intervention. More than 50% were admitted to the intensive care unit, and 80.5% needed ventilatory support. Fifty-seven percent had early onset septicemia. Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria accounted for 54% and 39% of the septicemia cases, respectively, whereas Candida spp was responsible for 7%. More than 50% of the staphylococci were resistant to cloxacillin, and all gram-positives were uniformly susceptible to glycopeptides and linezolid. Gram-negative bacteria showed variable resistance to cephalosporins (65%), piperacillin/tazobactam (29%), and carbapenems (11%). The attributable mortality rate for these septic episodes was 19% mainly because of gram-negative bacteria and Candida. CONCLUSION: The main etiologic agents of neonatal septicemia were coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and members of the family Enterobacteriaceae. Empirical therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam or carbapenems for gram-negative septicemia and glycopeptides for gram-positive septicemia was effective.