BACKGROUND: The appropriate use of anti-malarial drugs determines therapeutic efficacy and the emergence and spread of drug-resistant malaria. Strategies for improving drug compliance require accurate information about current practices at the consumer level. This is to ascertain that the currently applied new combination therapy to malaria treatment will achieve sustained cure rates and protection against parasite resistance. Therefore, this cross-sectional study was designed to determine knowledge and behaviour of the consumers in households (n = 397) in peri-urban location in a malaria holoendemic region of western Kenya. METHODS: The knowledge and behaviour associated with anti-malarial use were evaluated. Using clusters, a questionnaire was administered to a particular household member who had the most recent malaria episode (within <2 weeks) and used an anti-malarial for cure. Mothers/caretakers provided information for children aged <13 years. RESULTS: Consumers' knowledge on dosage and duration/frequency demonstrated that only 29.4% used the correct artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) dosage. Most respondents who used quinine identified the correct duration of use (96.4%) since its administration was entirely at health facilities. To assess behaviours during use of anti-malarial drugs, respondents were stratified into those who took drugs with prescription (39.4%) and without prescription (61.6%). For those without prescription, the reasons given were; procedure of acquisition less costly (39.0%), took same drug for similar symptoms (23.0%), not satisfied with health services (15.5%), neighbour/friend/relative previously taken the same drug (12.5%) and health institution was far from their location (10%). CONCLUSION: Majority of consumers in the study area were knowledgeable on the symptoms of malaria. In addition, majority acquired ineffective anti-malarial drugs for treatment and reported sub-optimal treatment regimens with the currently recommended drugs. Furthermore, behaviours which constrain the successful up-scaling of ACT were common, creating a challenge in the desire to turn efficacy to effectiveness of the combination therapy programme. It will be important to direct and focus interventions in creating awareness on the importance of using recommended drugs to lessen the use of less efficacious anti-malarials. In addition, the consumers need to be educated on the importance of drug adherence in such areas to reduce the emergence and spread of drug-resistant malaria.