INTRODUCTION: Infections with carbapenem-resistant enterobacteria are an emerging threat. This study reports the microbiologic, clinical, and epidemiologic features and the therapeutic outcomes of the infections caused by carbapenem- and pandrug-resistant Klebsiella emerged in our hospital. Fingerprinting analyses by automated repetitive extragenic palindromic-polymerase chain reaction (rep-PCR) and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry are also compared. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella spp. affecting 13 patients were investigated using automated rep-PCR (DiversiLab System) and MALDI-TOF. Species identification was performed by Vitek 2 System and MALDI-TOF. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was made using Vitek 2 System and Etest. Screening for extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) and carbapenemase production was made by double disk synergy and Hodge tests, respectively. Synergy studies were performed using Etest. DNA array was used for detection of KPC and ESBLs. bla(VIM-1) gene was amplified by PCR and sequencing. Use of carbapenems in the hospital was studied. RESULTS: A total of 13 patients were found to be colonized/infected with carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella. All patients were previously submitted to surgery and/or presented with severe underlying disease. After carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella isolation, the majority of the patients were treated with amikacin plus carbapenem, tigecycline, or fosfomycin. All Klebsiella isolates (n = 14), except two, had the bla(VIM-1) gene and all Klebsiella pneumoniae also had bla(SHV) gene associated with ESBL production. DiversiLab system showed higher discriminatory power than MALDI-TOF for strain typing. CONCLUSIONS: The risk of a rapid dissemination and the persistence of these multidrug-resistant strains through the time determine the need to implement routine procedures for metallo-beta-lactamase detection and measures for prevention of the spread of these microorganisms. The combined use of MALDI-TOF for species identification and DiversiLab System for clonal strain typing may be a useful tool for fast and accurate management of nosocomial outbreaks. The potential clinical utility of fosfomycin in this matter should be considered in future studies.