OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy of Telbivudine and Entecavir for therapy of HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis B for 52 weeks. METHODS: In this random and control study, the efficacy of Telbivudine and Entecavir treatments were compared in 180 patients with HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis B.The patients were randomly assigned to a daily 600 mg Telbivudine treatment group or daily 0.5 mg Entecavir group for 52 weeks. RESULTS: At week 52, HBV DNA undetectable rate was better in the Entecavir-treated group than in the Telbivudine-treated group, but didn't reach statistical significance. The viral breakthrough rates were significantly lower in the Entecavir-treated group than in the Telbivudine-treated group (x2 = 4.09, P <0.05). The clearance and seroconversion of HBeAg and the mean reductions of HBeAg from baseline at week 52 were significantly greater in the telbivudine-treated group than in the entecavir-treated group (x(2) clearance = 4.63, x(2) seroconversion = 4.80, (t-mean) reductions = 2.02; P < 0.05). The HBeAg seroconversion rates were not associated with both baseline ALT and baseline HBV DNA in both groups (P more than 0.05). In Telbivudine-treated group, the HBeAg decline is more than 2 log at week 24, HBeAg decline is more than 1 log at week 12 and the HBeAg baseline were independent factors correlated to HBeAg seroconversion rates at week 52 by Binary Logistic analysis, and also in entecavir-treated group the HBeAg decline is more than 2 log at week 24, HBeAg decline is more than 2 log at week 36 and the HBeAg decline is more than 2 log at week 12 were independent factors correlated to HBeAg seroconversion rates at week 52. CONCLUSION: Significant difference of HBeAg seroconversion rates at week 52 existed between Telbivudine-treated group and Entecavir-treated group. Entecavir is significantly superior to Telbivudine with less resistance to nucleosides. HBeAg decline is more than 2 log at week 24 is the best predicting factor for HBeAg seroconversion at week 52.