BACKGROUND: Patients with multiclass-resistant HIV-1 have limited treatment options. Raltegravir, an inhibitor of integrase, has shown excellent efficacy when used with protease inhibitors (Pis) in patients with drug-resistant HIV-1. Limited data are available however about the outcomes when using raltegravir without Pis in this population. METHODS: Medical records of subjects who received raltegravir as part of the Merck EAP study 0518 were reviewed and abstracted at participating sites. Eligibility criteria included HIV positivity, age >/= 16 years, limited or no treatment options due to resistance or intolerance to multiple antiretroviral regimens, detectable viremia on current treatment regimen, and documented resistance to at least one drug in each antiretroviral class (PI, NNRTI, and nucleoside analogue). Demographic, clinical, and laboratory data were collected locally using a standardized collection form. Genotypic susceptibility scores (GSS) were determined from the most recent genotypic resistance test available prior to the initiation of raltegravir. The main objective was to compare virologic results in patients who received raltegravir with a PI versus those who received raltegravir without a PI. RESULTS: Four hundred forty-two subjects were evaluated from the respective sites in the EAP trial, of whom 340 were evaluable. The baseline mean HIV RNA was 4.6 log copies/ mL, and the mean CD4 cell count was 159 cells/muL. The median number of total and new antiretroviral agents in the background regimen was 4 and 2, respectively. Among the 254 patients who received a PI, the most common PI used was darunavir (89%). Etravirine was commonly used in both groups: 39% of the PI group and 67% of the non-PI group. At week 12, 67% of PI patients and 64% of non-PI patients achieved HIV RNA <75 copies/mL and 85% and 86%, respectively, achieved HIV RNA <400 copies/mL GSS, which was similar in both groups at baseline, predicted achieving an HIV RNA of <400 and 75 copies/mL at week 12 (P < .05). CONCLUSIONS: In treatment-experienced patients, the combination of raltegravir with a regimen not containing a PI (used with etravirine in two-thirds of patients) had similar virologic activity when compared to more standard regimens using raltegravir with a PI. The main determinant of efficacy was the number of active drugs as measured by GSS. These data expand the potential utility of raltegravir in patients with multidrug-resistant HIV.