BACKGROUND: Shunts remain the commonest means by which hydrocephalus is treated. Despite the changes in valve and catheter technology, shunt infection and blockage are still a cause of great headache for the patient as well as the neurosurgeon. Antibiotic-laced catheters were proposed as a means by which to reduce shunt colonization and infection. METHODS: We present our experience of 52 months of Bactiseal catheters in all consecutive patients who underwent a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt from July 2004 to November 2008, under the care of one neurosurgeon. This was a prospective study with outcome measures of infection, blockage, intra and postoperative complications and revision surgery. RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-five patients underwent VP shunting with Bactiseal catheters, with a combination of NSC, Strata and Burr Hole valves. The age range of the patients was from 1 week premature to 64-years old. Forty-two of the patients were paediatric. The aetiology for hydrocephalus included posterior fossa tumoursto intra-ventricular haemorrhage, post-meningitic hydrocephalus and aqueduct stenosis. The overall complication rate was 12%. The following complications occurred: blockage in two cases; haemorrhage and blockage in two cases; CSF leak in one case; infection in four cases; other in three cases (peritoneal adhesions, wound erosion and postoperative peritonitis). There were four infections in total (3.2%). All of these occurred within six months of implantation. All infections were caused by rifampicin resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis. CONCLUSION: In an era of increasing methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) resistance and 'superbugs', is the use of antibiotic-laced catheters adding to the pool of resistant bacteria which may be harder to treat? Vigilance is required, as rare and resistant staphylococci strains occasionally can emerge as causative agents for VP shunt infections, in both adults and children, and their treatment can be difficult.