Infections with gastrointestinal nematodes (GIN) remain a major threat for ruminant production, health and welfare associated with outdoor breeding. The control of these helminth parasites has relied on the strategic or tactical use of chemical anthelmintic (AH) drugs. However, the expanding development and diffusion of anthelmintic resistance in nematode populations imposes the need to explore and validate novel solutions (or to re-discover old knowledge) for a more sustainable control of GIN. The different solutions refer to three main principles of action. The first one is to limit the contact between the hosts and the infective larvae in the field through grazing management methods. The latter were described since the 1970s and, at present, they benefit from innovations based on computer models. Several biological control agents have also been studied in the last three decades as potential tools to reduce the infective larvae in the field. The second principle aims at improving the host response against GIN infections relying on the genetic selection between or within breeds of sheep or goats, crossbreeding of resistant and susceptible breeds and/or the manipulation of nutrition. These approaches may benefit from a better understanding of the potential underlying mechanisms, in particular in regard of the host immune response against the worms. The third principle is the control of GIN based on non-conventional AH materials (plant or mineral compounds). Worldwide studies show that non conventional AH materials can eliminate worms and/or negatively affect the parasite's biology. The recent developments and pros and cons concerning these various options are discussed. Last, some results are presented which illustrate how the integration of these different solutions can be efficient and applicable in different systems of production and/or epidemiological conditions. The integration of different control tools seems to be a pre-requisite for the sustainable management of GIN infections. This new era of GIN management requires a new paradigm: to achieve enough control to reduce the negative impact of GIN infections enabling an optimum level of production, health and welfare.