Rosacea is a chronic multifactorial vascular skin disorder that affects about 10 percent of the general population. Metronidazole is an effective antibiotic in the treatment of moderate-to severe rosacea. Metronidazole is a suitable drug in cases of resistance to tetracycline or erythromycin, but it has also been shown that oral metronidazole may increase the side effects (e.g., peripheral neuropathy). Oral metronidazole should not be used for more than three months, and hence topical metronidazole gel is the best therapeutic choice in rosacea (especially during pregnancy). This study examined the mechanical (adhesiveness, cohesiveness, extrudability, spreadability, homogeneity) and rheological (viscosity), skin irritant and drug release properties of different metronidazole gel formulations that contain anionic emulsifying wax, glycerin and lactic acid in different proportions. The release studies were conducted using Franz diffusion cells and Silastic membrane as a barrier. The results indicated that gel compressibility, hardness, and adhesiveness, are the factors that influence the ease of gel removal from the container, ease of gel application onto the mucosal membrane, and gel bioadhesion. The findings showed that there exists a strong negative correlation between the spreadability of a formulation and its cohesiveness, the spreadability of a formulation is inversely proportional to its cohesiveness. However, sorbitol solution (70%) concentration was not significantly correlated with drug release. In addition, drug release was significantly reduced as the concentration of anionic emulsifying wax increased and the concentration of lactic acid decreased. The maximum metronidazole release was achieved at a pH of 4-6. Data obtained from in vitro release studies were fitted to various kinetic models and high correlation was obtained in the Higuchi and first order models. The results showed that all the gel formulations showed good extrudability, viscosity, cohesiveness, homogeneity and spreadability.