Trichinellosis is a widespread zoonoses for which no effective drug treatment is available at this time. Though anthelmintics such as mebendazole and albendazole are commonly used to treat human trichinellosis, none of these drugs are fully effective against the encysted or new-born larvae of Trichinella spiralis. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in developing newer anthelminthics from medicinal plants, particularly the ones used in traditional medicines in many parts of the world, due to the increasing spread of anthelminthic resistance and/or decreasing activity against encapsulated larval stages of parasites. The aim of the present study was to investigate the efficacy of leaf extract of Lasia spinosa (Araceae) against different life cycle stages of T. spiralis, i.e. adult (days 3 and 4 post-infection), migrating larvae (days 8, 9 and 10 post-infection) and encysted muscle larvae (days 31-37 post-infection). The study showed that L. spinosa leaf extract is effective against all the three life cycle stages of parasite. Against the adult stage, an oral administration of plant extract at 800 mg/kg dose revealed a 75.30% reduction in the number of adult worms, as compared to untreated controls at day 10 post-infection. Whereas against migrating larvae, the same dose of plant extract given for 3 days, reduced the number of larvae recovered from musculature of treated animals by 72.23%. However, in comparison of preceding two stages, the extract showed comparatively less efficacy against the encysted larvae of parasite. In this case, the 800 mg/kg dose of extract given for 7 days (after 30 day of post-infection) revealed only 64.84% reduction in the number of encysted larvae, as was evident from larval count on day 49 post-infection. Therefore, the results of this study indicate that leaf extract of L. spinosa possesses significant anthelminthic efficacy against the adult stages and migrating larvae of T. spiralis. On the other hand, the encysted muscle larvae of parasite are comparatively less sensitive to L. spinosa leaf extract treatment.