UNLABELLED: Endophthalmitis is one of the most dangerous complications after intravitreous drug injection. Preparing a patient to the injection general and topical endophtalmitis development risk factors should be eliminated. Antibiotic injection prophylaxis is still an important issue. PURPOSE: This research has to evaluate effectiveness and tolerance of Azithromycin (Azyter, Thea), in injection as an antibiotic prophylaxis in patients suffering from age-related macular degeneration (AMD). MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study was conducted in Ophtalmology Department (Medical Military Institute, Warsaw, Poland), in the group of 52 patients, who underwent 52 intraocular injections of anti-VEGF because of AMD. Topical Azithromycin had been administrated twice a day to both eyes in 2 days before injection. On the third day injection was performed in aseptic conditions. One drop of Azithromycin had been administrated to each eye directly before injection and one drop after the procedure. At that moment antibiotic prophylaxis was terminated. RESULTS: Topical tolerance and effectiveness were evaluated. In 2 cases (3.8%) intensive allergic reaction was reported (significant conjuctives oedema, itch, bloodshot), what caused change of antibiotic. In 5 cases (9%) light bloodshot was reported. 12 patients (23%) reported light or moderate foreign body sensation and in 2 cases (3.8%) the sensation was significant. No reaction of ophthalmic inflammation was reported 5 days after injection, moreover foreign body sensation and bloodshot were absent. 30 patients (57%) were satisfied with new and simplier scheme of antibiotic injection prophylaxis (twice a day for 3 days). CONCLUSIONS: Azithromycin is a comfortable alternative for other topical antibiotics, especially in repetitive procedures like anti-VEGF injections. High Azithromycin concentration in tissues, tear film, and on the ophthalmic surface, protects injection site and inhibits growth of primary and mutual bacterial colonies. Short-term exposition to Azithromycin decrases risk of drug resistance development.