AIM: The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B(AKT)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in many types of cancer, including breast cancer. It is recognized that breast cancer cells develop resistance to a variety of standard therapies through the activation of this pathway. We hypothesized that targeting this signaling by the mTOR inhibitor RAD001 may potentiate the cytotoxicity of a conventional chemotherapeutic drug, carboplatin, and enhance the treatment efficacy for breast cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell proliferation was measured with 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay; cell apoptosis with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Flow cytometry was used for the analysis of cell cycle distribution and mitochondrial membrane function. Gene expression at the protein level was determined by Western blot. RESULTS: MTOR inhibitor RAD001 enhanced the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to carboplatin. RAD001 in combination with carboplatin resulted in synergistic inhibition of cell proliferation and caspase-independent apoptosis in these cells. Moreover, in MCF-7 and BT-474 cells, synergistic effects of this combination on G(2)/M cell cycle arrest and regulation of different molecules responsible for cell cycle transition and apoptosis were observed. The p53 pathway was involved in the synergism of RAD001 and carboplatin on breast cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis, since the synergistic effect was demonstrated in all tested breast cancer cell lines with wild-type p53 and the use of p53 inhibitor partially antagonized the effect of RAD001 and carboplatin on p53 and p21 expression, as well as their inhibitory effect on cell proliferation. However, a synergistic effect of the combination of the two drugs on cell proliferation was observed in two p53-mutated cell lines with high AKT expression, suggesting that an alternative mechanism underlying the observed synergism exists. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the combination of RAD001 and carboplatin is a promising treatment approach for breast cancer. On the basis of these results, we have initiated a phase I/II clinical trial with the combination of carboplatin and RAD001 in patients with metastatic breast cancer.