Bacteria isolated from surgical infections during the period from April 2009 to March 2010 were investigated in a multicenter study in Japan, and the following results were obtained. In this series, 671 strains including 16 strains of Candida spp. were isolated from 174 (79.1%) of 220 patients with surgical infections. Four hundred and eleven strains were isolated from primary infections, and 244 strains were isolated from surgical site infection. From primary infections, anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria were predominant, followed by aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, while from surgical site infection aerobic Gram-positive bacteria were predominant, followed by anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria. Among aerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Enterococcus spp. was highest, followed by Streptococcus spp., and Staphylococcus spp. in this order, from primary infections, while Enterococcus spp. was highest, followed by Staphylococcus spp. from surgical site infection. Among aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Escherichia coli was the most predominantly isolated from primary infections, followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, in this order, and from surgical site infection, E. coli was most predominantly isolated, followed by P. aeruginosa and E. cloacae. Among anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria, the isolation rate of Eggerthella lenta was the highest from primary infections, followed by Parvimonas micra, Streptococcus constellatus and Finegoldia magna, and from surgical site infection, E. lenta was most predominantly isolated. Among anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, the isolation rate of Bilophila wadsworthia was the highest from primary infections, followed by Bacteroides fragilis, Bacteroides ovatus and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, and from surgical site infection, B. fragilis was most predominantly isolated, followed by B. ovatus, B. wadsworthia and B. thetaiotaomicron, in this order. In this series, we noticed no vancomycin-resistant Gram-positive cocci, nor multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa. We should carefully follow up B. wadsworthia which was resistant to various antibiotics, and also Bacteroides spp. which was resistant to many beta-lactam antibiotics.