A survey to determine the level of parasite resistance to benzimidazoles (BZ) under field conditions was performed on 107 commercial sheep farms located in the Aragon region of northeast Spain. Resistance was measured using the discriminant dose, a simplified form of the in vitro egg hatch assay (EHA). Taking into account the spatial structure of the data, a multivariate approach was applied to management and environmental variables as well as to their relationships with BZ resistance levels compiled from each flock. Results estimated that 11% of flocks had resistant parasite populations, although we suspected the presence of BZ-resistant parasite strains in 98% of the sample. Resistance levels were more similar among the nearest flocks, suggesting a contagious spatial distribution of resistance (i.e., resistance at neighbouring farms was not independent from one another). Management variables such as frequency of deworming, grazing in private pastures and underdosing were positively related to resistance levels, whereas only the use of BZ was negatively related to resistance levels, likely because BZ were replaced by other anthelmintics in flocks where reduced BZ efficacy was suspected. In addition to climatic conditions and seasonality, land use was an environmental variable associated with observed BZ resistance levels. Generally, resistance was highest in cooler and wetter areas but was lower in flocks sampled during January-March compared to flocks sampled in April-June or October-December. Variation partitioning procedures showed that the variation of resistance explained by the effect of environmental variables was higher than management variables. The effects of both variable groups, however, highly overlapped with the spatial structure of resistant levels, which suggests that a considerable amount of the effects attributable to both variable groups may be actually due to the spatial distribution of resistance. The resistance variation explained by the spatial component suggested that other uncontrolled factors acting at short spatial scale (e.g., common management and environmental variables; the importation of resistant strains and their posterior spread across neighbouring flocks; the selection history of the worms carried out by historical management events previous to this survey; and genetic, physiological or both types of parasite population variation) could yield this contagious spatial structure of BZ resistance. Although further research is needed, both seasonal variation and the dependence of resistance levels among neighbouring flocks should be taken into account in the design of future research or observational resistance programmes to minimise spatial and temporal pseudo-replication. Thus, research would avoid biased estimations of resistance prevalence or of its relationship with putative factors.