Frequency of invasive group A streptococcus (GAS) infections is increasing worldwide in recent 20 years. Serotypes responsible for these clinical manifestations and their antibiotic susceptibilities should be known in order to establish preventive measures and initiate appropriate treatment. This study was aimed to determine the serotypes, antibiotic susceptibilities and inducible clindamycin resistance among invasive GAS isolated between 2006-2009 period. A total of 22 GAS strains isolated from clinical samples [sterile body fluids (peritoneal, pleural, pericardial, joint and cerebrospinal fluids), blood, tissue biopsy] of the patients (14 male, 8 female; age range: 3-82 years, median age: 59) who admitted to Karadeniz Technical University Faculty of Medicine, Farabi Hospital located in Trabzon province (Eastern Black Sea Region of Turkey), between March 2006 and March 2009 were included in the study. GAS serotypes were determined by the investigation of serum opacity factors (SOF), T proteins and M proteins. SOF production was investigated by microplate method using human serum and SOF types were determined by SOF-inhibition test using specific antisera. T protein types were detected by agglutination method using polyvalent anti-T sera, and M serotypes were detected by capillary precipitation method using M antisera. Antimicrobial susceptibility tests were performed by disk-diffusion method according to CLSI recommendations. SOF were positive in 9 (41%) samples. Use of T antiserum yielded T (n= 8) and U (n= 7) types and M antiserum M1 (n= 4) and M2 (n= 3) types. The overall antibiotic susceptibility rate of the isolates was 68% (15/22) and overall resistance rate was 32% (7/22). All of the GAS strains were found susceptible to benzylpenicillin, ceftriaxone, vancomycin, levofloxacine and linezolid, however 9 (41%) were intermediate susceptible to tetracycline and 1 (4.5%) was intermediate susceptible to erythromycin. Four (18%) strains were found resistant to tetracycline, while three strains (13.5%) were found resistant to chloramphenicol. Inducible clindamycin resistance was found positive only in one strain. The serotypes determined in this study indicated that 33% of our invasive serotypes were covered by the hexavalent vaccine and 62% by the 26-valent vaccine. Multi-center surveillance studies are required to determine the serotype distribution of invasive GAS in Turkey and to provide valuable information for the development of appropriate vaccines in our country.