Imipenem, cefaperazon-sulbactam and cefepime are the antibiotics of choice for the treatment of soft tissue infections due to Acinetobacter baumannii. In this study, it was aimed to determine the invivo and invitro efficacy of, these antibiotics against drug susceptible and multidrug resistant A.baumannii in an experimental abscess model. Abscess models were established in Wistar-Albino type female rats. Susceptibility tests were performed by E-test. Rats were divided randomly into four groups with eight rats in one group. Standard absorbent paper discs containing 6 log10 CFU microorganisms were used to form an abscess model. The first group was regarded as the control group and the other three groups were the study group each treated with one of the test antibiotics. Cardiac blood samples for serum antibiotic efficacy test, were obtained on the fourth day of treatment and 30 minutes after the last dose. The number of live bacteria at the area of infection was determined by colony count method. All of the three antibiotics reached sufficient concentration in sera of rats and there were no statistically important difference between the efficacies of these antibiotics (p= 0.778). In all of the antibiotic-treated groups, the weight of the abscess material were less, macroscopic views were smaller and the colony counts per gram of abscess tissue were less than the control group (p< 0.001). All antibiotics were effective against susceptible and resistant strains in vitro. No resistance was detected against imipenem, cefaperazon-sulbactam and cefepime in the course of therapy. Cefaperazone-sulbactam and cefepime were as effective as imipenem against susceptible and multi-drug resistant A.baumannii both in vivo and in vitro. Since irrational use of extended spectrum cephalosporins are frequently associated with the emergence of carbapenem resistant strains, the use of relatively narrow spectrum antibiotics should better be considered in the empirical treatment of A.baumannii infections.