BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Serum amyloid A (SAA) is an acute-phase protein that has been recently correlated with obesity and insulin resistance. Therefore, we first examined whether human recombinant SAA (rSAA) could affect the proliferation, differentiation and metabolism of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. DESIGN: Preadipocytes were treated with rSAA and analyzed for changes in viability and [(3)H-methyl]-thymidine incorporation as well as cell cycle perturbations using flow cytometry analysis. The mRNA expression profiles of adipogenic factors during the differentiation protocol were also analyzed using real-time PCR. After differentiation, 2-deoxy-[1,2-(3)H]-glucose uptake and glycerol release were evaluated. RESULTS: rSAA treatment caused a 2.6-fold increase in cell proliferation, which was consistent with the results from flow cytometry showing that rSAA treatment augmented the percentage of cells in the S phase (60.9+/-0.54%) compared with the control cells (39.8+/-2.2%, (***) P<0.001). The rSAA-induced cell proliferation was mediated by the ERK1/2 signaling pathway, which was assessed by pretreatment with the inhibitor PD98059. However, the exposure of 3T3-L1 cells to rSAA during the differentiation process resulted in attenuated adipogenesis and decreased expression of adipogenesis-related factors. During the first 72 h of differentiation, rSAA inhibited the differentiation process by altering the mRNA expression kinetics of adipogenic transcription factors and proteins, such as PPARgamma2 (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2), C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) and GLUT4. rSAA prevented the intracellular accumulation of lipids and, in fully differentiated cells, increased lipolysis and prevented 2-deoxy-[1,2-(3)H]-glucose uptake, which favors insulin resistance. Additionally, rSAA stimulated the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines interleukin 6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha, and upregulated SAA3 mRNA expression during adipogenesis. CONCLUSIONS: We showed that rSAA enhanced proliferation and inhibited differentiation in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and altered insulin sensitivity in differentiated cells. These results highlight the complex role of SAA in the adipogenic process and support a direct link between obesity and its co-morbidities such as type II diabetes.