The economic impact of anthelmintic resistance was investigated in lambs by comparing productivity parameters in groups of animals treated either with a highly effective anthelmintic, or an anthelmintic to which three species of resistant worms were known to be present. Ten farmlets, each stocked with 30 lambs, were rotationally grazed for 5 months, with monthly treatments of either albendazole, to which resistance existed, or a new combination product containing derquantel and abamectin (DQL-ABA) to which there was no resistance. Stock on five farmlets were treated with each anthelmintic and productivity measures, including liveweights, body condition and faecal soiling were assessed throughout. In addition, fleece weights and information on carcass weight and quality was collected at the end of the trial. Anthelmintic efficacy was measured at the last two treatment dates by faecal egg count reduction test with larval cultures. Albendazole demonstrated efficacies of 48.4% and 40.9% for Trichostrongylus spp. and Teladorsagia circumcincta respectively. By contrast, the DQL-ABA treatments were >99% effective against all genera. The difference in live-weight gain was 9 kg in favour of the DQL-ABA treatments. This translated into a 4.7 kg increase in carcass weight with a 10.4% increase in carcass value. Significant differences in body condition scores, faecal breech soiling and fleece weights were also recorded, all in favour of the DQL-ABA treatments. The time required for 50% of the animals to reach a target live-weight of 38 kg was significantly shorter (by 17 days) in those animals treated with DQL-ABA. The results show that the production cost of subclinical parasitism as a result of using an anthelmintic product which is less than fully effective due to resistance can greatly exceed the cost of routine testing of anthelmintic efficacy and the adoption of new anthelmintic classes. There is a strong case for many farmers to re-evaluate their position on some of these issues in order to optimise financial performance.