In Europe, most nematodoses are subclinical involving morbid rather than mortal effects and control is largely achieved using anthelmintics. In cattle, the genera most associated with sub-optimal performance are Ostertagia and Cooperia whereas in sheep and goats, subclinical losses are most often caused by Teladorsagia and Trichostrongylus. In some regions, at certain times, other species such as Nematodirus and Haemonchus also cause disease in sheep and goats. Unfortunately, anthelmintic resistance has now become an issue for European small ruminant producers. One of the key aims of the EU-funded PARASOL project was to identify low input and sustainable approaches to control nematode parasites in ruminants using refugia-based strategies. Two approaches to optimise anthelmintic treatments in sheep and cattle were studied; targeted treatments (TT) - whole-group treatments optimised on the basis of a marker of infection e.g. faecal egg count (FEC), and targeted selected treatment (TST) - treatments given to identified individuals to provide epidemiological and/or production benefits. A number of indicators for TT and TST were assessed to define parasitological and production-system specific indicators for treatment that best suited the regions where the PARASOL studies were conducted. These included liveweight gain, production efficiency, FEC, body condition score and diarrhoea score in small ruminants, and pepsinogen levels and Ostertagia bulk milk tank ELISA in cattle. The PARASOL studies confirmed the value of monitoring FEC as a means of targeting whole-flock treatments in small ruminants. In cattle, bulk milk tank ELISA and serum pepsinogen assays could be used retrospectively to determine the levels of exposure and hence, in the next season to optimise anthelmintic usage. TST approaches in sheep and goats examined production efficiency and liveweight gain as indicators for treatment and confirmed the value of this approach in maintaining performance and anthelmintic susceptibility in the predominant gastrointestinal nematodes. There is good evidence that the TST approach selected less heavily for the development of resistance in comparison to routine monthly treatments. Further research is required to optimise markers for TT and TST but it is also crucial to encourage producers/advisors to adapt these refugia-based strategies to maintain drug susceptible parasites in order to provide sustainable control.