Resistance to fusidic acid in Staphylococcus aureus is caused by mutation of the elongation factor G (EF-G) encoded by fusA or by expression of a protein, encoded by fusB or fusC, that protects the drug target. Other mechanisms involved in this resistance are mutations in the riboprotein L6 operon within rplF. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence and mechanisms of resistance to fusidic acid in clinical isolates of S. aureus in Casablanca (Morocco) and to define the phenotypic and genotypic traits of these isolates and their clonal relationship. All fusidic acid-resistant S. aureus (FAR-SA) isolates were tested for fusB and fusC genes and were evaluated for the detection of mutations in fusA and fusE (rplF). fusB-positive strains were tested for a cadDX operon, encoding cadmium resistance. The agr group and the presence of toxin genes were monitored to characterize all FAR-SA isolates which were typed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and spa typing. Among 140 clinical S. aureus isolates collected in 2007 and 2008, 18 ( approximately 13%) exhibited resistance to fusidic acid. The most common resistance determinant was fusC, found in 16 isolates. Molecular typing showed that 14 of them harboured an agr group III and belonged to the same clonal complex (CC) spa type 127 and identical clonotype (cluster labelled A). These isolates also possessed the staphylococcal enterotoxin H gene. The second resistance determinant was fusB found in two isolates. These two isolates lacked cadDX gene and were found to belong to two unrelated clusters and spa types. While no isolate carrying mutations in rplF was found, 15 expressed a silent mutation in fusA (nucleotide 342). Only acquired fusidic acid resistance genes (mainly fusC) were prevalent among FAR-SA isolates with almost all of the clinical specimens belonging to CC-spa type 127. This study provides valuable data on the prevalence of fusidic acid-resistant S. aureus with the associated molecular mechanisms of resistance and the genetic background of the strains in Casablanca.