Limited number of publications described vaginal microflora after kidney transplantation. Our PubMed search revealed only 18 publications including words "vaginal bacteria & kidney transplant" in the period of 1978-2011. The aim of this study was to characterize lactobacilli isolated from vaginal swabs of women after kidney transplantation, compared with healthy women. Eighteen renal transplant recipients (mean age 36.1) and 20 healthy women (mean age 36.0) were evaluated. Lactobacilli were cultured on MRS and Columbia blood agars. Biochemical identification with API 50 CHL (bioMerieux, Marcy L'Etoile, France) and multiplex PCR according to Song et al. was performed. Lactobacilli were tested for production of H(2)O(2). Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of selected antimicrobial agents were determined with E-tests (bioMerieux, Marcy L'Etoile, France) and interpreted with CLSI and EUCAST criteria. No bacterial vaginosis was found among studied women. Two strains of group I were identified as Lactobacillus delbrueckii; 18 strains as Lactobacillus gasseri and 15 strains as Lactobacillus crispatus. Only 3 strains from group II were not identified by species-specific mPCR. Group IV was represented with 2 unidentified strains. Vaginal lactobacilli isolated from healthy women represented more homogenous group compared with heterogenous renal transplant recipients. Biochemical identification of lactobacilli by API 50 CHL kits was concordant with mPCR results only in 7 cases (17.5%), all 7 strains were identified as L. crispatus. Majority (93%) of lactobacilli were H(2)O(2) producers. All isolated lactobacilli (100%) demonstrated high resistance to metronidazole (MIC > 256 mug/ml). Only 2 strains resistant to vancomycin (MICs: 32 and 256 mug/ml respectively), in the study and control group, and one to moxifloxacin (MIC = 32 mug/ml), were found. Resistance to metronidazole and vancomycin was concordant in CLSI and EUCAST (2010) criteria. Although significant differences between lactobacilli isolated from vaginas of kidney transplant and healthy women were not demonstrated, we demonstrated strains resistant to metronidazole, vancomycin and moxifloxacin in groups of examined women. Our study was performed on a small group of kidney transplant recipients and further more detailed molecular studies on a larger group of patients are required to confirm our results.