A field study was conducted to test the hypotheses that use of a combination anthelmintic and/or increasing the pool of unselected worms 'in refugia' by leaving a proportion of lambs untreated would slow the development of resistance to ivermectin. Twelve suites of four paddocks (farmlets) were seeded with a mixture of resistant and susceptible isolates of both Trichostrongylus colubriformis and Teladorsagia (Ostertagia) circumcincta calculated to yield a 95% reduction in faecal nematode egg count (FEC) after treatment with ivermectin. Each year for three years the farmlets were stocked in the spring with mobs of lambs which were treated five times at 28-day intervals with either ivermectin or an ivermectin+levamisole combination. In addition, in half the mobs the heaviest 10% of lambs remained untreated at each treatment occasion, resulting in a 2 x 2 factorial treatment structure (i.e. two drench types x two percentage treated) with three complete replicates. The development of resistance to ivermectin, and at the end to levamisole, was measured by larval development assays (LDA) and worm counts from treated and untreated tracer lambs. For T. colubriformis the development of resistance to ivermectin, as measured by tracer lamb worm burdens, was delayed by treatment with the combination and by leaving 10% of lambs untreated. In addition, the interaction between these factors approached significance (p=0.052). Similarly, results of the LDAs indicated a slower development of resistance when lambs were treated with the combination and when 10% of lambs were left untreated. For T. circumcincta, results were compromised by the rapid development of resistance, which appears to be the result of low viability in the field of the susceptible isolate used to contaminate the pastures. Although a small delay in the development of resistance to ivermectin was indicated, this was off-set by an increase in the level of resistance to levamisole. A post-study modelling experiment simulating the conditions of the field study and the starting efficacies for the two nematode species produced equivalent outputs to those measured in the field. Overall, results support the conclusions that use of combination anthelmintics and deliberately increasing 'refugia' of unselected genotypes will slow the development of anthelmintic resistance. However, as indicated in modelling studies, once resistance to all the constituent actives is well developed (efficacy<70%) the value of combinations for slowing the development of resistance is largely lost.