Susceptibility testing of clinical isolates of anaerobic bacteria is not considered, often, mandatory in routine clinical practice and the treatments are empirically established. Thus, periodic monitoring of the susceptibility patterns of anaerobic bacteria is advisable. The aim of this study was to update on resistance of Bacteroides fragilis group in our Institution with special attention to carbapenems reporting metallo-beta-lactamase producing strains for the first time in Spain, and to compare fingerprinting analysis results obtained by using automated rep-PCR (DiversiLab System) and MALDI-TOF MS. A total of 830 non-duplicated clinical isolates of the B. fragilis group recovered from the years 2006 to 2010 were studied. B. fragilis was the most prevalent species (59.5%). The total susceptibility of B. fragilis group isolates were: penicillin, 13.3%; amoxicillin/clavulanic, 89.6%; piperacillin-tazobactam, 91.8%; cefoxitin, 65.8%; ertapenem, 95.9%; imipenem, 98.2%; clindamycin, 53.4% and metronidazole, 96.4%. The percentage of sensitive isolates did not change significantly over time for amoxicillin/clavulanic, cefoxitin, clindamycin and metronidazole. A slight increase in the rate of resistance to ertapenem and imipenem was observed. Imipenem resistance and carbapenemase production were detected for the first time in our laboratory in the year 2007. No other report of carbapenemase-producing B. fragilis in our country has been previously published. Six imipenem-resistant isolates were MBL-producing and PCR positive for cfiA gene. Four of them were PCR positive for IS-like immediately upstream cfiA gene and two of them were negative. Both, automated rep-PCR (DiversiLab) and MALDI-TOF MS, revealed a great genetic diversity among carbapenem-producing strains suggesting the acquisition of novel resistance genes more than clonal dissemination of them. Both methods seem to be useful tools for fast and accurate identification and strain typing of B. fragilis group in the daily laboratory routine. Because of the relevant increase observed in Bacteroides species isolated from blood cultures and the appearance of carbapenemase-producing strains in our Institution, we recommend to test the antimicrobial susceptibility of the isolates, at least in the most severe patients.