OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possibility of the emergence of praziquantel resistance in Schistosoma japonicum in Mainland China under drug pressure. METHODS: S. japonicum cercaria were released from the infected Oncomelania hupensis snails collected from the marshland in Hunan Province that was endemic for schistosomiasis japonica and raised in the laboratory of Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, and mice were infected. O. hupensis snails were infected with miracidia hatched from the schistosome mature eggs that were isolated from the liver of the infected mice. The life cycles of a field isolate and a laboratory passage isolate of S. japonicum were established in laboratory via the cycle of mouse-snail. The mice were infected with 40 cercariae each, 35 days later post-infection, were grouped randomly into control and resistance-induced groups. All the mice in the control group were sacrificed on day 45 post-infection, and any adult S. japonicum worms in the hepatic and portomesenteric veins were recovered and counted, and the worm burdens were calculated. The mice in the resistance-induced group were administered orally with the sub-curative dose of praziquantel, and were sacrificed 22 days post-treatment. Any adult S. japonicum worms in the hepatic and portomesenteric veins were recovered and counted, and the worm burdens and reduction in the worms recovered which were obviously caused by the praziquantel treatment were calculated. The eggs in the liver of the mice in the resistance-induced group were isolated and hatched to yield miracidia, and then the snails were again infected with the newly hatched miracidia to complete the first-passage inducement. After raising in laboratory at 25 degrees C for 60-70 days post-infection, the infected snails were isolated and shed cercaria, and the mice were infected with the newly released cercaria to start a new passage of resistance-inducement. The oral dose of praziquantel for the first-passage inducement was 100 mg/kg, and an additional 100 mg/kg was given every 2-3 passages. The mice were infected with cercariae of the parasite with 8-passge resistance-inducement and the isolate that was not induced, and 35 days post-infection, were administered with praziquantel at a single oral doses of 300 mg/kg and 600 mg/kg respectively. All the mice were sacrificed 14 days post - treatment, and any adult S. japonicum worms in the hepatic and portomesenteric veins were recovered and counted, and the reductions in the worm burdens were calculated to assess the sensitivity of praziquantel in the parasites after 8-passage resistance-inducement. RESULTS: Two isolates of Jiangsu laboratory passage of Jiangsu and field isolate of Hunan were established in the laboratory, and a total 8-passage resistance -inducement was completed. For the laboratory passage isolate, the worm burden reduction was 22.3% post-treatment with 100 mg/kg praziquantel during the first-passage inducement, and 53.7% post-treatment with 300 mg/kg praziquantel during the 8-passage inducement, appearing that the worm burden reduction increased with the increasing dose of praziquantel. For the field-collected isolate, the worm burden reduction was 66.8% post-treatment with 100 mg/kg praziquantel during the first-passage inducement, and 20.6% post-treatment with 300 mg/kg praziquantel during the 8-passage inducement, indicating that the worm burden reduction markedly decreased with the increasing dose of praziquantel. The worm burden reductions were 71.5% and 97.4% respectively for the mice infected with the non-induced laboratory passage isolate, while administered with praziquantel at doses of 300 mg/kg and 600 mg/kg respectively. After 8-passage treatment with sub-curative praziquantel, the corresponding worm burden reductions decreased to 32.6% and 68.1%, respectively. For the field-collected isolate without inducement, the worm burden reductions in the mice were 70.8% and 97.5% respectively post-treatment with praziquantel at doses of 300 mg/kg and 600 mg/ kg respectively, and the corresponding worm burden reductions decreased to 45.7% and 61.9%, respectively after 8-passage treatment. COCLUSIONS: S. japonicum (strain of Mainland China) is able to develop resistance to praziquantel under continuous drug pressure. However, there are variations in the potential of the emergence of resistance due to various susceptibility of praziquantel among different isolates. The successful establishment of praziquantel-resistant strain of S. japonicum (Mainland China) will provide the basis for exploring the mechanism of praziquantel resistance in S. japonicum, and developing related techniques to detect and monitor praziquantel resistance.