Visceral leishmaniasis caused by the intracellular parasite Leishmania donovani is a major public health problem in the developing world. The emergence of increasing number of L. donovani strains resistance to antimonial drugs recommended worldwide requires the intervention of effective vaccine strategy for treatment of VL. In the present study L. donovani culture derived, soluble, secretory serine protease (pSP) has been shown to be vaccine target of VL. Protection from VL could be achieved by the use of safer vaccine which generally requires an adjuvant for induction of strong Th1 response. To assess the safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of pSP as vaccine candidate in mouse model we used IL-12 as adjuvant. BALB/c mice immunized with pSP+IL-12 were protected significantly from challenged infection even after four months by reducing the parasite load in liver and spleen and suppressed the development of the disease along with an increase in IgG2a antibody level in serum, enhanced delayed type hypersensitivity and strong T-cell proliferation. Groups receiving pSP+IL-12 had an augmented pSP antigen specific Th1 cytokines like IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha response with concomitant decrease of Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 after vaccination. In this study the vaccine efficacy of pSP was further assessed for its prophylactic potential by enumerating matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) profile which has been implicated in various diseases. MMP-9 associated with different microbial infections is controlled by their natural inhibitors (TIMPS) and by some cytokines. In this study pSP was found to regulate excessive inflammation by modulating the balance between MMP-9 and TIMP-1 expression. This modulatory effect has also been demonstrated by IFN-gamma mediated down regulation of TNF-alpha induced MMP-9 expression in activated murine macrophages. This is the first report where a secretory L. donovani serine protease (pSP) adjuvanted with IL-12 could also act as protective imunogen by modifying cytokine mediated MMP-9 expression in experimental VL. These findings elucidate the mechanisms of regulation of MMP-9 following infection of L. donovani in vaccinated animals and thus pave the way for developing new immunotherapeutic interventions for VL.