UNLABELLED: The appearance of new antimicrobials with activity against Gram-positive multiresistant cocci and knowledge of the limitations of glycopeptides has represented an important change in the use of these antibiotics. OBJECTIVE: To analyze at the national level changes in the use of antibiotics with specific activity against Gram-positive multiresistant cocci in critically ill patients admitted to the ICU as well as the characteristics of patients treated with these agents and the forms of administration. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Retrospective cohort study of patients admitted to the ICU for more than 24 hours between 2008 and 2010 in the ENVIN-HELICS national registry. Cases were defined as patients who had received one or more of the following antibiotics: vancomycin, teicoplanin, linezolid or daptomycin. The characteristics of patients who used one or more of these agents were compared with those treated with other antibiotics. Indications and forms of use of each antibiotic were assessed. Descriptive results are presented. RESULTS: A total of 45,757 patients, 27,982 (61.2%) of whom received 63,823 antimicrobials were included in the study. In 6,368 (13.9%) patients, one or more antibiotics specifically active against Gram-positive multiresistant cocci were given. There was a predominance of the use of vancomycin and linezolid and an important increase in the prescription of daptomycin (+320%) and linezolid (+22.4%). In more than 95% of cases, linezolid and daptomycin were prescribed for the treatment of infections, whereas vancomycin and teicoplanin were used for prophylaxis in 20-25% of cases. Between 75% and 80% of indications for treating infections, antibiotics were used empirically except for daptomycin which was used as a directed treatment in 43% of the cases. Only in one third of the indications for empirical treatment, susceptible microorganisms were identified (appropriate treatment). CONCLUSIONS: The use of antibiotics with activity against Gram-positive multiresistant cocci remained stable around 14% of all indications. The use of vancomycin and linezolid predominated and there was a clear trend towards an increase in the use of daptomycin and linezolid and a decrease in the use of glycopeptides. Empirical treatments were considered appropriate in only one third of cases.