OBJECTIVES: Enhanced inflammation is evident in HIV infection, even with virological suppression. Outside HIV infection, studies show an independent association between higher total bilirubin and better endothelial function as well as a lower prevalence of coronary heart disease, possibly as a consequence of the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effect of bilirubin. The aim of this study was to determine whether such an association exists in HIV-infected individuals. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed in HIV-1-infected adults on stable antiretroviral therapy (ART) to determine if a relationship exists between total bilirubin and endothelial function [flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery], inflammation [interleukin-6 (IL-6), soluble tumour necrosis factor receptors, C-reactive protein, and adhesion molecules], coagulation markers (fibrinogen and D-dimer) and oxidative stress (F (2) -isoprostanes). Endpoints were compared based on total bilirubin levels and atazanavir status using distributionally appropriate, two-sample tests. Correlation coefficients were determined between total bilirubin and endpoints. Linear regression was used to model the relationship between total bilirubin (and atazanavir status) and FMD. RESULTS: A total of 98 adults were included in the study. Total bilirubin was higher in the atazanavir group when compared to the non-atazanavir group [median (interquartile range) 1.8 (1.1-2.6) vs. 0.6 (0.4-1.4) mg/dL; P < 0.01] as were insulin, the homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and fibrinogen. Total bilirubin was positively correlated with fibrinogen and was not correlated with other outcomes. After adjustment, neither total bilirubin nor atazanavir status was associated with FMD. CONCLUSIONS: In virologically suppressed, HIV-infected adults on stable ART, neither total bilirubin nor atazanavir use was associated with improved endothelial function as measured using FMD, inflammation or oxidative stress as measured using biomarkers.