Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) are the natural targets of beta-lactam antibiotics and mutations in pbp1a, pbp2b, and pbp2x genes, which encode PBPs, are responsible for resistance to beta-lactams in Streptococcus pneumoniae. In the present study, we intended to determine how often the common mutation patterns occurred within the pbp1a, pbp2b, and pbp2x PBP gene regions and evaluate the PBP genotype mutations which were associated with penicillin resistance in several penicillin-susceptible and - resistant S.pneumoniae isolates in Mersin, Turkey. A total of 62 S.pneumoniae strains isolated from different clinical specimens (32 nasopharyngeal swab, 16 sputum, 3 blood, 3 wound, 2 cerebrospinal fluids and one of each urine, abscess, bronchoalveolar lavage, conjunctival swab, tracheal aspirate, middle ear effusion) were included in the study. Penicillin susceptibilities of the isolates were searched by disc diffusion and E-test methods, and 23 of them were identified as susceptible, 31 were intermediate susceptible, and eight were resistant to penicillin. A rapid DNA extraction procedure was performed for the isolation of nucleic acids from the strains. Distribution of PBP gene mutations in pbp1a, pbp2b, and pbp2x gene regions related to penicillin resistance was determined by using a wild-type specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based technique. PBP gene alterations of those isolates were also evaluated in relation to penicillin susceptibility and resistance patterns. Twenty two (95.7%) of 23 penicillin-susceptible S.pneumoniae isolates exhibited no mutation in the three PBP genes (pbp1a, pbp2x, and pbp 2b), while 1 (4.3%) of these harbored mutations in all of the three PBP genes. The penicillin-intermediate susceptible S.pneumoniae isolates exhibited various combinations of mutations. One (3.2%) of 31 penicillin-intermediate susceptible isolates exhibited no mutation in the three PBP genes, while 22 (71%) of them yielded mutations in all of the three PBP genes. The remaining 8 (25.8%) isolates harbored mutations for dual PBP genes (in five strains pbp1a and pbp2b; in two strains pbp2x and pbp2b; in one strain pbp1a and pbp2x). Seven (87.5%) out of eight penicillin-resistant S.pneumoniae isolates (MIC >/= 2 microg/ml) revealed mutations in all of the three PBP genes and the other penicillin-resistant isolates exhibited no mutation in the PBP genes. The present study supplied important data on the frequency of different patterns of mutations occurring at various regions of PBP genes related to penicillin resistance in S.pneumoniae isolates in our restricted region. The results supported the notion that penicillin resistance in S.pneumoniae was mainly attributed to alterations in pbp1a, pbp2x, and pbp2b gene regions and wild-type sequence specific PCR could be applied to characterize genotypic background of penicillin resistance in S.pneumoniae strains.