A field study was conducted in a sheep flock in the south east of Scotland with a history of ivermectin resistance in Teladorsagia circumcincta. The objective of the study was to compare the effects of single anthelmintic treatments in ewes before turn-out onto pasture that was contaminated with a moderate level of overwintered, ivermectin resistant, T. circumcincta infective larvae. The ewes were treated according to label directions with either a long acting injectable formulation of moxidectin (1mg/kg; affording up to 14 weeks persistent action against macrocyclic lactone (ML)-susceptible T. circumcincta) or an oral formulation of moxidectin (0.2mg/kg; affording up to 5 weeks persistent action against ML-susceptible T. circumcincta). The lambs were enrolled in the normal management of the farm, and received a total of three oral ivermectin treatments during the 16 week study. The efficacy of both treatment strategies in controlling the periparturient rise in faecal nematode worm egg counts and subsequent pasture contamination was assessed from the faecal worm egg counts of the ewes and their lambs between lambing and weaning. Ewes that were treated with the oral formulation of moxidectin shed approximately 3.5 times more T. circumcincta eggs between lambing and weaning than ewes that were treated with the long acting formulation of moxidectin. This difference was reflected in the faecal worm egg counts of the lambs that were grazed alongside the different treatment groups of ewes. The results of the current study demonstrate persistent efficacy of the long acting formulation of moxidectin against an ivermectin resistant T. circumcincta population. The decreased pasture contamination after treatment could lead to improved lamb growth and a need for fewer anthelmintic treatments, thus potentially reducing one possible selection pressure for anthelmintic resistance. However, treatment with the long acting formulation of moxidectin would give rise to fewer susceptible nematodes being present in refugia, which could increase another possible selection pressure for anthelmintic resistance, depending on the subsequent grazing management of that pasture. The rationale for use of a persistent anthelmintic drug to control the periparturient rise in faecal ML-resistant T. circumcincta egg output of the ewes is discussed and potential differences in selection for macrocyclic lactone anthelmintic resistance using the different formulations of moxidectin are acknowledged.