OBJECTIVE: Primary: to compare one-off administration of boric acid powder with courses of 1% acetic acid and ciprofloxacin eardrops in treating active chronic otitis media. Secondary: to evaluate the effectiveness of Quadriderm(R) cream in resistant active chronic otitis media; and to document side effects of these treatments, especially hearing loss. STUDY DESIGN: Randomised controlled trial. SETTING: Outpatient department of a tertiary ENT unit. PARTICIPANTS: Hundred and fifty-nine patients over 6 years old with active chronic mucosal (without cholesteatoma) otitis media randomised to receive one of the three primary agents. METHOD: All techniques employed were suitable for primary healthcare givers as well as specialists. After confirming eligibility, patients were randomly allocated to treatment. All ears underwent toilet with irrigation using clean water, a syringe and ambient light, with or without dry mopping, until the perforation was visible. The randomised solution was flushed through the middle ear and eustachian tube using a 'tragal pump' technique: saline was used as the solution for flushing in the boric acid powder arm. Patients allocated topical ear medication were given a bottle of eardrops to administer (six drops twice daily, 'pumped in') until finished. Those allocated boric acid powder had the external ear canals filled as a one-off treatment. Patients were followed up monthly thereafter. OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary: Dry (inactive) middle ears as assessed by the doctor. Secondary: Patient assessment of success; microbiologic culture and sensitivity; audiologic changes because of treatment; complications of treatment; costs of therapies. RESULTS: Ciprofloxacin eardrops and boric acid powder were statistically superior to 1% acetic acid eardrops in rendering active chronic otitis media inactive (73% dry ears for ciprofloxacin; 67% for boric acid powder; and 24% for acetic acid). There was no difference between the success rates of ciprofloxacin eardrops and boric acid powder. Quadriderm cream was effective in 85% of patients failing first-line therapy. No agent caused significant complications and specifically no hearing loss. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed a single application of boric acid powder following external auditory canal irrigation until the perforation was visible to be as effective as the current best practice of topical quinolone eardrops in active chronic otitis media. Boric acid powder is inexpensive and does not require patient compliance. Boric acid powder is a viable, less costly alternative to topical antibiotic/steroid ear drops in the developing world for active chronic otitis media. Acetic acid eardrops 1% are ineffective. Quadriderm cream, given as a one-off therapy, also appears to be effective.