OBJECTIVE: Endotoxin tolerance corresponds to reprogramming of mononuclear phagocytes after iterative encounters with toll-like receptor agonists aimed to dampen the inflammatory response. We investigated why this phenomenon cannot be observed with murine alveolar macrophages. DESIGN: Animal study. SETTING: Research institution laboratory. SUBJECTS: rag2-/-, rag2gammac-/-, cd3epsilon-/-, micro-/-, il-15-/-, Jalpha18-/-, ifngammar-/-, il-18r-/-, and wild-type mice. INTERVENTIONS: Alveolar macrophages were harvested from untreated mice or after injection of endotoxin. Alveolar macrophages were activated in vitro with endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide), and tumor necrosis factor production was monitored. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In contrast to monocytes or peritoneal macrophages, alveolar macrophages did not display endotoxin tolerance in an ex vivo model after injection of endotoxin. An in vivo systemic inhibition of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor or interferon-gamma allowed the induction of alveolar macrophage endotoxin tolerance, which was also observed in interferon-gamma receptor-deficient mice. Using mice missing different leukocyte subsets and adoptive cell transfers, we demonstrated the involvement of B lymphocytes in interferon-gamma production within the lung microenvironment and in the prevention of alveolar macrophage endotoxin tolerance. Furthermore, we demonstrated the importance of interleukin-18 in preventing alveolar macrophage endotoxin tolerance through studies of interleukin-18 messenger RNA expression in il-18r-/- mice and injection of interleukin-18 in rag2-/- and micro-/- mice. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the conclusion that at homeostasis in the lungs, constitutive expression of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin-18, interferon-gamma and possibly interleukin-15, and a cross-talk between B lymphocytes and alveolar macrophages create a microenvironment specific to the lungs that prevents alveolar macrophages from becoming tolerant to endotoxin.