CONTEXT: Respiratory tract infections (RTI) are common causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Initial antibiotic therapy in upper and lower respiratory tract infections is usually empirical. The increasing evidence of antibacterial resistance in the pathogens commonly associated with pneumonia has raised concerns about the efficacy of currently available therapies and poses a challenge to clinicians. Gemifloxacin is a synthetic fluoroquinolone antimicrobial agent exhibiting potent activity against most Gram negative and Gram positive organisms. Hence, this study was planned to evaluate the efficacy of gemifloxacin as an empirical therapy in pneumonia. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was an open labelled, single-arm study. Patients with clinical features of community acquired pneumonia (CAP) who fulfilled the inclusion criteria received treatment with oral gemifloxacin 320 mg once daily for 5-7 days. Once enrolled in the study, patients were treated as outpatient or as inpatient depending on clinical need. The primary efficacy was to evaluate the clinical response at the end of therapy, i.e., day 9-11 for CAP. Secondary efficacy parameters included radiological and bacteriological response at the end of therapy. Patients were evaluated three times during the entire course of treatment (Visit 1, Day 0; Visit 2, Day 2-4; Visit 3, Day 9-11) for their clinical, radiological and/or bacteriological response, as well as for safety assessment. RESULTS: A total of 105 patients received the study medication (gemifloxacin 320 mg orally). Two patients were "lost to follow-up" and one patient had to discontinue medication due to insufficient therapeutic effects. Clinical response at the end of therapy was successful in 99 (96.1%) while clinical failure was reported in 4 (3.9%) patient. As per the radiological response, 77.1% of the total cases showed improvement, 8.6% had no change, and 2.9% cases had deterioration in radiological findings. Gemifloxacin is an effective drug in the management of CAP. CONCLUSIONS: Gemifloxacin with coverage against both Gram positive and Gram negative organisms as well as atypical pathogens, with once daily oral dosing and minimum side effect is a very effective and economical choice for treating CAP empirically.