Antimicrobial treatment of animals may select resistance in Campylobacter to antimicrobial agents belonging to several classes of compounds. We investigated the effect of widely used aminopenicillin therapy on the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) levels in porcine Campylobacter coli isolates and investigated the presence of a beta-lactamase gene and beta-lactamase production. Epidemiological cut-off values (ECOFFs) were applied to detect decreased susceptibility. Fifty-three isolates were obtained from aminopenicillin-treated (ampicillin or amoxicillin) sows and piglets during and up to 3 weeks post-treatment. All isolates had ampicillin MICs below the ECOFF (</= 8 mug/mL). An additional 63 isolates were sampled before treatment or from other untreated sows and piglets. Of these isolates, four had ampicillin MICs above the ECOFF. All ciprofloxacin MICs were below the ECOFF (</= 1 mug/mL), except for three isolates from untreated sows and four isolates after aminopenicillin therapy. One isolate originating from an untreated sow had an erythromycin MIC above the ECOFF (> 16 mug/mL). None of the isolates had MICs above the ECOFFs for two or three studied antimicrobials simultaneously. Of the 116 C. coli isolates, 90 (77.6%) isolates carried the bla(OXA-61) beta-lactamase gene, and 63 (70.0%) of those produced beta-lactamase. The isolates producing beta-lactamase had higher ampicillin MICs than those without the bla(OXA-61) gene and production of beta-lactamase. Proportion of the bla(OXA-61)-positive C. coli isolates was similar among untreated animals or during and after the treatment. In conclusion, C. coli isolates did not acquire high ampicillin MICs even though aminopenicillins were administered at therapeutic levels for several days. The bla(OXA-61) gene and production of beta-lactamase increased ampicillin MICs in C. coli, but the values remained mainly under the ECOFF. We also demonstrated that aminopenicillin therapy did not select simultaneously resistance to the major antimicrobials used in human therapy against campylobacteriosis (i.e., erythromycin and ciprofloxacin).