OBJECTIVE: To analyze the changes of ocular bacterial isolates and their susceptibility to ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, levofloxacin, gatifloxacin and tobramycin in Henan Province in the past six years. METHODS: Retrospective study of ocular bacterial isolates and their in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility test results of Henan Eye Institute in the past six years. RESULTS: A total of 2044 bacterial isolates were classified into 39 kinds in the past six years, which were mainly from the conjunctival sac. Staphylococcus epidermidis was the most common, followed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus. All kinds of the ocular bacteria had the highest susceptibility to gatifloxacin (92.3%) among the tested drugs. Rods were more sensitive to quinolone drugs than cocci and gram-positive rods were more sensitive to tobramycin than the other types of germs. The drug's susceptibility of the four kinds of quinolone except ciprofloxacin decreased year by year with a decreasing ladder fashion every two years in the susceptibility change of levofloxacin in the past six years, while the susceptibility of tobramycin increased slowly from 2004 to 2008 and then decreased. Staphylococcus epidermidis susceptibility to every drug had the similar trend with the general changes in the past six years, that is, their susceptibility to ofloxacin decreased significantly since 2008, their susceptibility to gatifloxacin and tobramycin reduced significantly in 2009. Although Pseudomonas aeruginosa susceptibility to all the drugs had no significant change, for all gram-negative rods, their susceptibility to the four kinds of quinolone drugs were higher than their susceptibility to tobramycin while their susceptibility to levofloxacin and gatifloxacin reduced significantly as time passed by, especially from the year 2008 to 2009. CONCLUSIONS: The most common ocular bacterial isolates were Staphylococcus epidermidis, followed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Ocular bacterial isolates' susceptibility to gatifloxacin in vitro was significantly higher than to other drugs in every year but decreased significantly in 2009 while their susceptibility to ofloxacin and levofloxacin decreased significantly since 2008. Their susceptibility to tobramycin increased slowly from 2004 to 2008 and then decreased.