PURPOSE: The factors preventing the translation of preclinical findings supporting the clinical development mTOR-targeted therapy in pancreatic cancer therapy remain undetermined. Stromal cell.derived factor 1alpha (SDF-1alpha)-CXCR4 signaling was examined as a representative microenvironmental factor able to promote mTOR-targeted therapy resistance in pancreatic cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Primary pancreas explant xenografts and in vitro experiments were used to perform pharmacodynamic analyses of SDF-1alpha-CXCR4 regulation of the mTOR pathway. Combinatorial effects of CXCR4, EGFR, and mTOR pharmacologic inhibition were evaluated in temsirolimus-resistant and -sensitive xenografts. Intratumoral gene and protein expressions of mTOR pathway effectors cyclin D1, c-Myc, and VEGF were evaluated. RESULTS: Baseline intratumoral SDF-1alpha gene expression correlated with temsirolimus resistance in explant models. SDF-1alpha stimulation of pancreatic cells resulted in CXCR4-mediated PI3-kinase-dependent S6-RP phosphorylation (pS6-RP) on exposure to temsirolimus. Combinatorial therapy with AMD3465 (CXCR4 small-molecule inhibitor) and temsirolimus resulted in effective tumor growth inhibition to overcome temsirolimus resistance. In contrast, SDF-1alpha exposure induced a temsirolimus-resistant phenotype in temsirolimus-sensitive explants. AMD3465 inhibited CXCR4-mediated intratumoral S6-RP phosphorylation and cyclin D and c-myc gene expression. Next, CXCR4 promoted intratumoral EGFR expression in association with temsirolimus resistance. Treatment with AMD3465, temsirolimus- and erlotinib-mediated tumor growth inhibition to overcome temsirolimus resistance in the explant model. Lastly, SDF-1alpha-CXCR4 signaling increased intratumoral VEGF gene and protein expression. CONCLUSIONS: SDF-1alpha-CXCR4 signaling represents a microenvironmental factor that can maintain mTOR pathway fidelity to promote resistance to mTOR-targeted therapy in pancreatic cancer by a variety of mechanisms such as recruitment of EGFR signaling and angiogenesis.