Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains were isolated from eye swab samples randomly obtained from 100 seropositive HIV/AIDS patients who reported to various anti-retroviral treatment clinics at the University of Benin Teaching Hospital and Central Hospital both based in Benin City, Nigeria. Invitro antibiotic sensitivity patterns of strains before curing were determined by the Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion technique. Resistance plasmid DNA of multidrug resistant strains was cured with 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulphate and cured strains were again subjected to in vitro antibiotic sensitivity testing. EcoRI and Hind III restriction endonuclease enzymes were used to make cuts on extracted plasmid DNA whose length sizes were then determined. A total of 36 (36.0%) strains made up of 27 (75.0%) Staphylococcus. aureus and 9 (25.0%) Pseudomonas aeruginosa were isolated of which 7 (19.4%) strains showed multidrug resistance to ciprofloxacin, pefloxacin, ofloxacine, gentamycin, tetracycline, ampicillin, chloramphenicol, nitrofurantoin and erythromycin. All seven multidrug resistant strains before curing, recorded 85.7%, 42.9%, 14.3% and 14.3% sensitivity in that decreasing order to ciprofloxacin, pefloxacin, ofloxacin and gentamycin respectively. There was 0.0% sensitivity each to tetracycline and ampicillin. After curing, there was enhanced sensitivity of 100.0%, 85.7%, 28.6% and 71.4% respectively. There was also 28.6% and 57.1% improved sensitivity to tetracycline and ampicillin after curing. Before curing, there was 76.2% average resistance to all used antibiotics and this reduced to 47.6% after curing Staph. aureus plasmid DNA. In the case of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, there was an average resistance of 76.3% before curing which fell to 42.5% after curing. EcoRI restriction enzyme gave the plasmid DNA length of Staphylococcus aureus strain 04 as 4.0Kb and this size depended upon the distance between recognition sites. Isolation of 36 (36.0%) strains of both isolates from 100 eye swabs shows the danger these organisms portend to all categories of opticians. The cheapness and high sensitivity of gentamycin justifies its use as eye drops for treatment of some eye infections. Curing of plasmid DNA is an indication that if SDS is administered to the organisms in sublethal doses, it can lead to the elimination of plasmid DNA without adverse effect on the genomic DNA of the bacterial strains.