Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a modern-day pandemic; 2-3% of the world's population are thought to be infected with the virus and are subsequently at risk of developing end-stage liver diseases. The traditional standard of care (SOC) for HCV-infected patients has been limited to a regimen of pegylated-interferon alpha (pegIFN) and ribavirin; displaying low cure rates in a majority of patients and severe side effects. However, in 2011 the first direct-acting antivirals (DAA) were licensed to treat HCV-infected patients in combination with SOC, which served to elevate treatment response rates. The HCV drug development pipeline is currently populated with many additional and improved DAAs; primarily molecules that target the virus-encoded protease or polymerase enzymes. These molecules are being evaluated both in combination with the traditional SOC and together with other DAAs as all-oral pegIFN-free regimens with the ultimate goal of developing multiple DAA-containing HCV therapies that do not rely on an pegIFN backbone. A recent addition to the arsenal of HCV inhibitors in development is represented by an entirely new DAA class; molecules that target the HCV-encoded non-enzymatic NS5A protein. NS5A is essential for HCV propagation and, although its actual functions are largely unknown, it is likely a key regulator of viral genome replication and virion assembly. The protein is exquisitely sensitive to small molecule-mediated inhibition; NS5A-targeting molecules are probably the most potent antiviral molecules ever discovered and exhibit a number of other attractive drug-like properties, including activity against many HCV genotypes/subtypes and once-daily dosing potential. Although their mechanism of action is unclear, NS5A-targeting molecules are already proving their utility in clinical evaluation; particularly as components of pegIFN-sparring DAA combination regimens. This review will aim to amalgamate our current understanding and knowledge of NS5A-targeting molecules; their discovery, properties, applications, and insight into their future impact as components of all-oral pegIFN-free DAA combination therapies to combat HCV infection.