Plasmodium vivax is the predominant species of the human malaria parasite present in the Indian subcontinent. There have been recent reports on Chloroquine (CQ) resistance and severe manifestations shown by P. vivax from different regions of the world including India. This study focuses on Bikaner, India where during the last few years there have been continuous reports of severe manifestations by both Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax. This region has a widespread use of Chloroquine and Sulfadoxine-Pyrimethamine for the treatment of malaria, but the resistance profiles of these drugs are not available. We report here the profile of mutations in marker genes associated with Chloroquine and antifolate drug resistance among the P. vivax parasites obtained from patients with severe (n=30) and non-severe (n=48) manifestations from this region. Most isolates showed the wild type alleles for both the Chloroquine and antifolate resistance markers (P<0.0005). Except for one isolate showing Y976F mutation in the Pvmdr-1 gene, no reported mutation was observed in the Pvmdr-1 or Pvcrt gene. This is in accordance with the fact that till date no Chloroquine resistance has been reported from this region. However, the single isolate with a mutation in Pvmdr-1 may suggest the beginning of the trend towards decreased susceptibility to Chloroquine. The frequency of PvDHFR-PvDHPS two locus mutations was higher among the patients showing severe manifestations than the patient group with non-severe (uncomplicated) malaria (P<0.003). None of the parasites from patients with uncomplicated P. vivax malaria showed the mutant PvDHPS genotype. Novel mutations in PvDHFR (S117H) and PvDHPS (F365L, D459A and M601I) were observed only in the parasite population obtained from patients exhibiting severe complications. Preliminary homology modeling and molecular docking studies predicted that these mutations apparently do not have any effect on the binding of the drug molecule to the enzyme. However, the presence of novel mutations in the PvDHPS gene indicate a degree of polymorphism of this molecule which is in contrast to available published information.