This study was conducted to assess the antimicrobial susceptibility rate of Salmonella and Campylobacter spp. isolated from Northern German fattening pigs. From 540 lymph node samples, 16 Salmonella Typhimurium, 1 Salmonella Brandenburg, 37 Campylobacter coli, and 11 Campylobacter jejuni strains were isolated. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was carried out by the broth dilution method. The 14 tested antibiotics for Salmonella were ampicillin, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, colistin, florfenicol, gentamicin, kanamycin, nalidixic acid, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, and trimethoprim. The eight tested antibiotics for Campylobacter spp. were ampicillin, ampicillin-sulbactam (2:1), ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, gentamicin, nalidixic acid, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (1:19), and tetracycline. In total, 93.7% (n = 16) of Salmonella Typhimurium, 75.7% (n = 37) of C. coli, and 54.5% (n = 11) of C. jejuni isolates were resistant to at least one of the tested antibiotics. Multiresistance to three antibiotics was observed in 75% of Salmonella Typhimurium, 16.2% of C. coli, and 0% of C. jejuni isolates. Pansusceptibility was detected in 6.3% of Salmonella Typhimurium, 24.3% of C. coli, and 45.5% of C. jejuni isolates. Multiresistance is defined as resistance to three or more antibiotics, and pansusceptibility is defined as not having resistance to any antibiotic. Regarding drugs of last resort--cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin, and nalidixic acid--resistance was not common among Salmonella (6.3%). The resistance rate of Campylobacter spp. to last-resort drugs--erythromycin, ciprofloxacin, and nalidixic acid--varied between species. The observed trend was not statistically significant. No C. coli isolates and few C. jejuni isolates (9.1%) were resistant to erythromycin. In contrast to C. jejuni, the C. coli isolates were more likely to be resistant to ciprofloxacin (9.1 and 18.9%, respectively) and nalidixic acid (0 and 13.5%, respectively). The same phenomenon was detected for tetracycline (27.3 and 62.2%, respectively), sulfamethoxazole (9.1 and 43.2%, respectively), and ampicillin (9.1 and 21.6%, respectively).