BACKGROUND: Enterococcus faecalis may contribute to periodontal breakdown in heavily infected subgingival sites, particularly in patients responding poorly to mechanical forms of periodontal therapy. Because only limited data are available on the antimicrobial sensitivity of enterococci of subgingival origin, this study evaluates the in vitro antibiotic susceptibility of E. faecalis isolated from periodontitis patients in the United States. METHODS: Pure cultures of 47 subgingival E. faecalis clinical isolates were each inoculated onto specially prepared broth microdilution susceptibility panels containing vancomycin, teicoplanin, and six oral antibiotics of potential use in periodontal therapy. After incubation in ambient air for 18 to 20 hours, minimal inhibitory drug concentrations were determined using applicable Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute criteria and interpretative guidelines. The organisms were additionally evaluated for in vitro resistance to metronidazole at 4 mug/mL. RESULTS: Periodontal E. faecalis exhibited substantial in vitro resistance to tetracycline (53.2% resistant), erythromycin (80.8% resistant or intermediate resistant), clindamycin (100% resistant to 2 mug/mL), and metronidazole (100% resistant to 4 mug/mL). In comparison, the clinical isolates were generally sensitive to ciprofloxacin (89.4% susceptible; 10.6% intermediate resistant) and 100% susceptible in vitro to ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanate, vancomycin, and teicoplanin. CONCLUSIONS: Tetracycline, erythromycin, clindamycin, and metronidazole revealed poor in vitro activity against human subgingival E. faecalis clinical isolates, and would likely be ineffective therapeutic agents against these species in periodontal pockets. Among orally administered antibiotics, ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanate, and ciprofloxacin exhibited marked in vitro inhibitory activity against periodontal E. faecalis, and may be clinically useful in treatment of periodontal infections involving enterococci.