BACKGROUND: The genetic features that facilitate Campylobacter jejuni's adaptation to a wide range of environments are not completely defined. However, whole genome expression studies showed that respiratory proteins (RPs) were differentially expressed under varying conditions and stresses, suggesting further unidentified roles for RPs in C. jejuni's adaptation. Therefore, our objectives were to characterize the contributions of selected RPs to C. jejuni's i- key survival phenotypes under different temperature (37 degrees C vs. 42 degrees C) and oxygen (microaerobic, ambient, and oxygen-limited/anaerobic) conditions and ii- its interactions with intestinal epithelial cells from disparate hosts (human vs. chickens). RESULTS: C. jejuni mutant strains with individual deletions that targeted five RPs; nitrate reductase (DeltanapA), nitrite reductase (DeltanrfA), formate dehydrogenase (DeltafdhA), hydrogenase (DeltahydB), and methylmenaquinol:fumarate reductase (DeltamfrA) were used in this study. We show that only the DeltafdhA exhibited a decrease in motility; however, incubation at 42 degrees C significantly reduced the deficiency in the DeltafdhA's motility as compared to 37 degrees C. Under all tested conditions, the DeltamfrA showed a decreased susceptibility to hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), while the DeltanapA and the DeltafdhA showed significantly increased susceptibility to the oxidant as compared to the wildtype. Further, the susceptibility of the DeltanapA to H(2)O(2) was significantly more pronounced at 37 degrees C. The biofilm formation capability of individual RP mutants varied as compared to the wildtype. However, the impact of the deletion of certain RPs affected biofilm formation in a manner that was dependent on temperature and/or oxygen concentration. For example, the DeltamfrA displayed significantly deficient and increased biofilm formation under microaerobic conditions at 37 degrees C and 42 degrees C, respectively. However, under anaerobic conditions, the DeltamfrA was only significantly impaired in biofilm formation at 42 degrees C. Additionally, the RPs mutants showed differential ability for infecting and surviving in human intestinal cell lines (INT-407) and primary chicken intestinal epithelial cells, respectively. Notably, the DeltafdhA and the DeltahydB were deficient in interacting with both cell types, while the DeltamfrA displayed impairments only in adherence to and invasion of INT-407. Scanning electron microscopy showed that the DeltahydB and the DeltafdhA exhibited filamentous and bulging (almost spherical) cell shapes, respectively, which might be indicative of defects in cell division. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the RPs contribute to C. jejuni's motility, H(2)O(2) resistance, biofilm formation, and in vitro interactions with hosts' intestinal cells. Further, the impact of certain RPs varied in response to incubation temperature and/or oxygen concentration. Therefore, RPs may facilitate the prevalence of C. jejuni in a variety of niches, contributing to the pathogen's remarkable potential for adaptation.