OBJECTIVE: To analyze the condition of early (</= 30 d) postoperative pulmonary infection in children after living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). METHOD: The clinical data of 36 cases undergoing LDLT in Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University were analyzed retrospectively from June 2006 to December 2009. RESULT: Of 36 cases without preoperative respiratory disease, 17 were boys, 19 were girls. Their age ranged from 2 months to 14 years. Pulmonary infection developed in 24 patients, of whom 4 cases died (17%) and 3 deaths were related to pulmonary infection. Pulmonary infection occurred in 17 of 20 infants (85%) and 10 of 11 cases (91%) with liver function of Child-Pugh grade C. Twenty cases (83%) developed pulmonary infection within first 2 weeks after LDLT. Totally 65 pathogenic strains of microorganisms were isolated, in which Gram-negative bacteria, Gram-positive bacteria and fungi were 46 strains, 5 strains, 14 strains respectively. The most frequently isolated bacteria were Pseudomonas aeruginosa (14 strains), Klebsiella pneumoniae (8 strains) and Acinetobacter baumannii (8 strains). Pseudomonas aeruginosa showed a resistance rate of almost 100% to cotrimoxazole, tetracycline, chloramphenicol, ampicillin, the first, the second and some of the third generation cephalosporins. Klebsiella pneumoniae producing extended spectrum beta-lactamase had a resistance rate of almost 100% to beta-lactams except carbapenems. Acinetobacter baumannii was exquisitely susceptible to carbapenems, but showed a high resistance to penicillins and cephalosporins. Candida albicans, which was the most common fungus, showed a susceptibility rate of 100% to amphotericin B. In the LDLT recipients of pulmonary infection, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections occurred in 2 patients and Epstein Barr virus (EBV) infection in 1 patient. CONCLUSION: The incidence of early postoperative pulmonary infection was high in children undergoing LDLT, especially in infants. And the mortality should not be ignored. The high risk period for infection was within the first 2 weeks after operation. The pathogens were mainly Gram-negative bacteria, which showed high and multidrug resistance.