BACKGROUND: Engineered mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) have been used in many preclinical studies of gene directed enzyme/prodrug therapy. We aimed to compare the efficacy of two most frequently used systems, as well as evaluate the extent of a bystander effect mediated by therapeutic MSC towards cell lines derived from different tumours. METHODS: Two approaches were compared: (i) herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (TK)/ganciclovir (GCV) and (ii) yeast cytosine deaminase fused with uracil phosphoribosyltransferase (CD::UPRT)/5-fluorocytosine (5-FC). The cytotoxic effect mediated by therapeutic MSC was evaluated in direct co-culture by a fluorimetric assay. The expression profile of tumour cells was analyzed by a quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and the ability of gap-junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) was evaluated by a dye transfer assay. RESULTS: Both systems were effective only on glioblastoma cells (8-MG-BA). The CD::UPRT-MSC/5-FC system showed efficiency on melanoma A375 cells. We decreased the sensitivity of 8-MG-BA cells and A375 cells to the CD::UPRT-MSC/5-FC system by pharmacological inhibition of thymidylate synthase, and we achieved a similar result in A375 cells by inhibition of thymidine phosphorylase. Although we demonstrated functional GJIC in A375 cells, TK-MSC were ineffective in mediating the bystander effect similarly to HeLa cells, which were also relatively resistant to CD::UPRT-MSC/5-FC treatment. TK-MSC/GCV treatment had a strong cytotoxic effect on MDA-MB-231 cells (breast carcinoma), whereas CD::UPRT-MSC/5-FC treatment failed as a result of overexpression of the gene for ABCC11. Transfection of the MDA-MB-231 cell line with small interference RNA specific to ABCC11 led to a significantly increased sensitivity to the CD::UPRT-MSC/5-FC approach. CONCLUSIONS: GJIC, expression of enzymes involved in drug metabolism and ABC transporters correlate with the response of tumour cells to treatment by MSC-expressing prodrug-converting genes.