BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Beta-lactam antibiotics prescribed in periodontal therapy are vulnerable to degradation by bacterial beta-lactamases. This study evaluated the occurrence of beta-lactamase-positive subgingival bacteria in chronic periodontitis subjects of USA origin, and assessed their in vitro resistance to metronidazole at a breakpoint concentration of 4 mug/mL. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Subgingival plaque specimens from deep periodontal pockets with bleeding on probing were removed from 564 adults with severe chronic periodontitis before treatment. The samples were transported in VMGA III and then plated onto: (i) nonselective enriched Brucella blood agar (EBBA) and incubated anaerobically for 7 d; and (ii) selective trypticase soy-bacitracin-vancomycin (TSBV) and incubated for 3 d in air + 5% CO2 . At the end of the incubation periods, the bacterial test species were identified and quantified. Specimen dilutions were also plated onto EBBA plates supplemented with 2 mug/mL of amoxicillin, a combination of 2 mug/mL of amoxicillin plus 2 mug/mL of the beta-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid, or 4 mug/mL of metronidazole, followed by anaerobic incubation for 7 d. Bacterial test species presumptively positive for beta-lactamase production were identified by growth on EBBA primary isolation plates supplemented with amoxicillin alone and no growth on EBBA primary isolation plates containing both amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid. A subset of such isolates was subjected to nitrocefin-based chromogenic disk testing to confirm the presence of beta-lactamase activity. In vitro resistance to 4 mug/mL of metronidazole was noted when growth of test species occurred on metronidazole-supplemented EBBA culture plates. RESULTS: Two-hundred and ninety-four (52.1%) of the study subjects yielded beta-lactamase-producing subgingival bacterial test species, with Prevotella intermedia/nigrescens, Fusobacterium nucleatum and other Prevotella species most frequently identified as beta-lactamase-producing organisms. Of the beta-lactamase-producing bacterial test species strains recovered, 98.9% were susceptible in vitro to metronidazole at 4 mug/mL. CONCLUSION: The occurrence of beta-lactamase-positive subgingival bacterial species in more than half of the subjects with severe chronic periodontitis raises questions about the therapeutic potential of single-drug regimens with beta-lactam antibiotics in periodontal therapy. The in vitro effectiveness of metronidazole against nearly all recovered beta-lactamase-producing subgingival bacterial species further supports clinical periodontitis treatment strategies involving the combination of systemic amoxicillin plus metronidazole.