BACKGROUND & AIMS: Daclatasvir and asunaprevir are NS5A and NS3 protease-targeted antivirals currently under development for treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Clinical data on baseline and on-treatment correlates of drug resistance and response to these agents are currently limited. METHODS: Hepatitis C virus genotype 1b Japanese patients (prior null responders to PegIFN-alpha/RBV [n=21] or PegIFN-alpha/RBV ineligible or intolerant [n=22]) were administered daclatasvir/asunaprevir for 24 weeks during a phase 2a open-label study. Genotypic and phenotypic analyses of NS3 and NS5A substitutions were performed at baseline, after virologic failure, and post-treatment through follow-up week 36. RESULTS: There were three viral breakthroughs and four relapsers. Baseline NS3 polymorphisms (T54S, Q80L, V170M) at amino acid positions previously associated with low-level resistance (<9-fold) to select NS3 protease inhibitors were detected in four null responders and three ineligibles, but were not associated with virologic failure. Baseline NS5A polymorphisms (L28M, L31M, Y93H) associated with daclatasvir resistance (<25-fold) were detected in five null responders and six ineligibles. All three viral breakthroughs and 2/4 relapsers carried a baseline NS5A-Y93H polymorphism. NS3 and NS5A resistance-associated variants were detected together (NS3-D168A/V, NS5A-L31M/V-Y93H) after virologic failure. Generally, daclatasvir-resistant substitutions persisted through 48weeks post-treatment, whereas asunaprevir-resistant substitutions were no longer detectable. Overall, 5/10 patients with baseline NS5A-Y93H experienced virologic failure, while 5/10 achieved a sustained virologic response. CONCLUSIONS: The potential association of a pre-existing NS5A-Y93H polymorphism with virologic failure on daclatasvir/asunaprevir combination treatment will be examined in larger studies. The persistence of treatment-emergent daclatasvir- and asunaprevir-resistant substitutions will require assessment in longer-term follow-up studies.