AIM: To identify hepatitis B virus polymerase gene mutations during antiviral therapy using lamivudine-adefovir sequential monotherapy followed by lamivudine-adefovir combination therapy. METHODS: The patient cohort included four adult chronic hepatitis B patients who had undergone sequential monotherapy, first with lamivudine (LMV) and then, after developing viral breakthrough, with adefovir (ADV) therapy. All of the patients had non-response or viral breakthrough after LMV-ADV sequential monotherapy, which resulted in the switching of their antiviral regimen to LMV-ADV combination therapy. Eleven serum samples from the four patients who showed non-response to rescue LMV-ADV combination therapy were collected sequentially at a time before the antiviral treatment and then during the LMV monotherapy, ADV monotherapy, and LMV-ADV combination therapy. For the genotypic analysis, the whole 1310-bp polymerase gene region was amplified, cloned and sequenced. RESULTS: All patients had been previously treated with 100 mg of LMV once daily for a 15- to 26-mo period. The emergence of resistance mutations to LMV, such as rtM204V/I and/or rtL180M, were found in all patients. Their antiviral regimens were switched to ADV monotherapy as the second line treatment. All patients had viral breakthrough or non-response after the LMV-ADV sequential monotherapy. ADV-resistant mutations were detected after 13 to 19 mo of LMV-ADV sequential monotherapy. The rtA181V/T mutations were predominantly identified during the ADV treatment in the LMV-resistant patients. Twenty-seven of 38 clones were combined with an amino acid change at rt181; three clones had mutations in rt236 and one clone had a combined mutation. The rtA181V/T mutations were not suppressed by the LMV-ADV combination therapy. Thirty-nine of 64 clones showed an rtA181V/T mutation and six clones showed combined mutations in rt181 and rt236. Mutations in rt204 re-emerged during the combination treatment. The rt181 and rt204 mutations did not co-exist in one clone. CONCLUSION: Add-on lamivudine therapy with adefovir for adefovir resistance may not suppress the pre-existing adefovir-resistant mutation that develops during lamivudine-adefovir sequential monotherapy.