BACKGROUND: Cefpodoxime is a semisynthetic third generation cephalosporin analogue with a relatively broader spectrum of antimicrobial activity against gram negative and gram positive organisms. This is attributed to their somewhat increased resistance to degradation by the betalactamase. Cefpodoxime shows good activity against Klebsiella pneumonia, many members of enterobactericeae and almost all strains of Escherichia coli. It is extensively used in human beings against infections caused by susceptible organisms for a prolonged period and even without its judicious indication. Though various researchers have worked on the pharmacokinetic aspects of the drug, its effects on biochemical parameters and spermatozoa activity are scarcely available in literature. AIM: To determine the oral kinetic ( blood and tissue) after single therapeutic dose of cefpodoxime proxetil (20mg/kg oral bid 7 days) in rats of either sex on tissue half life and certain biochemical parameters such as glucose, hemoglobin, protein, ALT, AST and other parameters like tissue residue, sperm count and spermatozoa motility in male rats. MATERIALS AND METHODS: For kinetic studies,24 Wister rats of either sex, 3 months of age, (180-210 gm) were used.(Group I-IV; n=6) Blood samples collected from each animal of Group IV through heart puncture at 0 hour to serve as predrug control. All the group (I-IV) received cefpodoxime proxetil 20 mg/kg once orally as a single dose. At the end of 1,4,12 and 24 hour post oral administration, GroupI,II,III and IVwere utilized for kinetic studies. Blood samples were collected from each animal and vital organs viz brain, lung, liver, spleen, kidney and heart were dissected out for drug analysis and determination of weight. For biochemical parameters, tissue residue and spermatozoa motility, twelve male rats were randomly divided into Groups A and B (n=6) Group B received cefpodoxime (20mg/kg orally bid 7 days) while Group A served as control. Biochemical parameters [Blood glucose, protein, Aspartate transaminase(AST), Alanine transaminase(ALT)and hemoglobin] were measured at 0 and 7 th day while sperm count (total,live and dead)and mean organ weight (study and control group) and tissue residue of drug were evaluated at the end of treatment. Absorption of cefpodoxime was observed at 2 hour and reached a maximum at 4 hour and persisted in blood till 24 hour. Elimination half life in lung was highest followed by heart, liver, kidney and spleen while t(1/2) k in plasma was very low suggesting more affinity of cefpodoxime for tissues than blood. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Blood glucose, protein, AST and ALT activities were not significantly altered but the hemoglobin level and total and live sperm count decreased significantly in the study group compared to the control group. Residual level of cefpodoxime was highest in liver followed by kidney and other study organs. Therefore, the drug should be used in human beings judiciously and further study on human subjects is warranted.