Gastrointestinal nematodes (GIN) are a significant constraint to pasture-based sheep production worldwide. Anthelmintic resistance (AR) has been reported in most sheep-raising areas in the world, yet little is known about the AR status in Canada. This study was conducted to determine the frequency of AR in GIN in sheep flocks in Ontario, Canada. Forty-seven sheep flocks were enrolled in the study, and their level of parasitism was monitored monthly throughout a grazing season by analyzing owner-acquired fecal samples from 15 grazing lambs per flock. When the mean GIN fecal egg count (FEC) reached a threshold of 200 eggs per gram (epg), oral ivermectin was supplied to producers to check ivermectin efficacy; the reduction in mean FEC 14 days after ivermectin treatment was calculated. 'Drench failure' was defined as a reduction in mean FEC of <95%. In those flocks with apparent drench failure, researchers performed a Fecal Egg Count Reduction Test (FECRT), dividing sheep into 4 treatment groups (n=10-15): control (i.e. untreated), ivermectin, and, if sufficient numbers of animals - fenbendazole and levamisole. AR was defined as a reduction in mean FEC <95% and a lower 95% confidence interval <90%. Larval cultures were performed on pooled post-treatment FECRT samples. Larval Development Assays (LDAs) to detect the presence of resistance to thiabendazole and levamisole were performed prior to the ivermectin drench check on pooled owner-acquired fecal samples that reached the 200 epg threshold. Approximately 89% (42/47) of the farms reached the FEC threshold of 200 epg; 93% (39/42) of these farms performed an ivermectin drench check, and 88% (34/39) of these farms had drench failure. The FECRT was performed on 29 of the 34 farms. Resistance to ivermectin, fenbendazole and levamisole was demonstrated on 97% (28/29), 95% (19/20) and 6% (1/17) of the farms tested, respectively, with considerable variability in resistance levels among farms. Haemonchus sp. was the most commonly cultured parasite from post-treatment fecal samples. LDA results for 21 farms were available; of these, 14% (3/21) and 62% (13/21) had low and high levels of thiabendazole resistance, respectively, while none of the farms exhibited resistance to levamisole. Amongst these tested farms, resistance to both ivermectin and benzimidazoles was very common. These findings strongly suggest that AR, particularly in Haemonchus sp., is a serious problem in these sheep flocks. Thus, marked changes in GIN management need to be instituted immediately to mitigate a worsening situation.