The proteasome inhibition and mitochondrial dysfunction are involved in pathomechanism of Parkinson's disease. The main aim of this study was to assess how particular culture conditions of human dopaminergic neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells could affect the extent of neurodegeneration induced by proteasome inhibitor-lactacystin (LC) and mitochondrial toxin-rotenone (Rot). This study revealed that induction of neuronal differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells with retinoic acid (RA-SH-SY5Y) caused a higher resistance of these cells to LC-evoked cell death when compared to undifferentiated cells (UN-SH-SY5Y). In contrast, RA-SH-SY5Y cells were more vulnerable than the UN-SH-SY5Y to Rot-induced cell damage. Furthermore, we found that a prolonged incubation of the cells under low serum condition (PLSC) significantly increased the LC toxicity in both differentiated and undifferentiated cells. Next, the effects of combined treatment with LC and Rot on cell viability were studied in RA-SH-SY5Y cells under PLSC and normal low serum condition (NLSC). At a low concentration, Rot (0.001-1 muM) attenuated the LC-evoked cell death in RA-SH-SY5Y cells exposed to NLSC. In contrast, under PLSC low concentrations of Rot lacked neuroprotective action while its higher levels (10 muM) enhanced the LC toxicity. Further, we showed that low concentrations of celastrol (Cel; 0.001 muM), a putative neuroprotective agent with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, were able to partially attenuate the Rot-evoked toxicity under both PLSC and NLSC. On the other hand, Cel (0.001 and 0.01 muM) attenuated the LC-induced cell damage only under PLSC. Interestingly, higher concentrations of Cel (>1 muM) reduced cell viability in both UN- and RA-SH-SY5Y but only in UN-SH-SY5Y cells the effect was enhanced under PLSC. The obtained data indicate that toxicity of LC and Rot in SH-SY5Y cell line depends on the stage of cell differentiation and is enhanced in cells cultured for a longer time in low serum medium. Moreover, the neuroprotective properties of Rot and Cel against the LC-induced cell damage can be observed only under particular low serum conditions.