BACKGROUND: The NF-kappaB activating kinases, IKKalpha and IKKbeta, are key regulators of inflammation and immunity in response to infection by a variety of pathogens. Both IKKalpha and IKKbeta have been reported to modulate either pro- or anti- inflammatory programs, which may be specific to the infectious organism or the target tissue. Here, we analyzed the requirements for the IKKs in myeloid cells in vivo in response to Francisella tularensis Live Vaccine Strain (Ft. LVS) infection. METHODS AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In contrast to prior reports in which conditional deletion of IKKbeta in the myeloid lineage promoted survival and conferred resistance to an in vivo group B streptococcus infection, we show that mice with a comparable conditional deletion (IKKbeta cKO) succumb more rapidly to lethal Ft. LVS infection and are unable to control bacterial growth at sublethal doses. Flow cytometry analysis of hepatic non-parenchymal cells from infected mice reveals that IKKbeta inhibits M1 classical macrophage activation two days post infection, which has the collateral effect of suppressing IFN-gamma(+) CD8(+) T cells. Despite this early enhanced inflammation, IKKbeta cKO mice are unable to control infection; and this coincides with a shift toward M2a polarized macrophages. In comparison, we find that myeloid IKKalpha is dispensable for survival and bacterial control. However, both IKKalpha and IKKbeta have effects on hepatic granuloma development. IKKalpha cKO mice develop fewer, but well-contained granulomas that accumulate excess necrotic cells after 9 days of infection; while IKKbeta cKO mice develop numerous micro-granulomas that are less well contained. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together our findings reveal that unlike IKKalpha, IKKbeta has multiple, contrasting roles in this bacterial infection model by acting in an anti-inflammatory capacity at early times towards sublethal Ft. LVS infection; but in spite of this, macrophage IKKbeta is also a critical effector for host survival and efficient pathogen clearance.