The narrow range of choice and virus resistance to the most common drugs require search and introduction of new drugs with proven efficacy and safety for the treatment of influenza. Ergoferon is a new combined medicine containing release active antibodies to interferon-gamma (anti-IFNgamma), CD4-coreceptor and histamine. The formulation influences various links of antiviral defense and provides antiinflammatory effect. The efficacy of the drug is related to its production process during which multiple reduction of the initial concentration of every component leads to release of special release activity. Previous experimental studies showed that anti-IFNgamma had antiviral activity against pandemic influenza virus A (H1N1) 2009 comparable to that ofoseltamivir (suppression of virus replication in the lung tissue, increase of the lifespan and reduction of the laboratory animals mortality). The aim of the multicentre randomized clinical trial was to compare (versus oseltamivir) the efficacy and safety of ergoferon in the treatment of influenza in adults. 213 patients with flu-like symptoms were examined in 8 medical centres of Russia during two epidemiological seasons (2010-11 and 2011-12). The inclusion criteria were: the first 48 hours after the onset; fever > or =37.8 degrees C, at least one common symptom and at least one respiratory symptom. Influenza was confirmed in 52 patients by QuickVue rapid diagnosis. 23 patients received ergoferon according to the treatment scheme and 29 received oseltamivir (daily dose 150 mg). Duration of the treatment was 5 days. The patients were followed up for 7 days. The primary endpoint was the percentage of the patients with the body temperature normalization for 2-5 days of the treatment. The maximum efficacy of ergoferon was observed on the second day of the treatment: almost half (48%) of the initially febrile patients had normal body temperature (versus 28% in the patients treated with oseltamivir). The comparison of the two groups of the patients by the morning and evening measurements of the body temperature every five days of the treatment by Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel revealed a significant difference between the two groups (chi2 = 7.1; p = 0.008). The average duration of the fever in the group of ergoferon was 2.3 +/- 1.2 days, in the group of oseltamivir--2.6 +/- 1.3 days (the efficacy of oseltamivir in the present study was comparable with the previously published data). The percentage of the patients treated with antipyretics because of hyperthermia on the second day of the treatment lowered 3 times and amounted to 17% (versus 41% in the oseltamivir group). The severity of common and respiratory symptoms (nose/throat/chest) significantly decreased on the third day of the treatment in both groups, the majority of the patients had either minimum severity or no signs of influenza. The clinical improvement was associated with positive changes in the life quality. No cases of the disease aggravation were recorded. Complications requiring antibiotic treatment or hospitalization were not observed during the followup. There were no adverse events recorded due to the drug use. No deviations in the laboratory indices were stated. Ergoferon is a new safe drug for the treatment of influenza. Its clinical efficacy was comparable to that of oseltamivir. The therapeutic effects of the drug were evident from: significant reduction of the disease severity, duration of febricity and general toxicity and respiratory flu symptoms, lower percentage of the patients with fever for 2 days. The febrile period in most of the patients did not exceed 2 days.