Increasing number of drug resistant tuberculosis (TB) cases, observed in recent years, is an important public health problem. Extensively drug resistant TB (XDR-TB) is the development of resistance against any fluoroquinolones and at least one of the injectable second line anti-TB drugs in addition to resistance against isoniazide and rifampicin which are the first line anti-TB drugs [definition of multidrug resistant TB (MDR-TB)]. Anti-TB therapy failed with first-line anti-TB drugs due to MDR-TB cases is being planned according to second-line anti-TB drug susceptibility test results if available and if not, standart treatment protocols are used. Although it is recommended that individual anti-TB therapy should be designed according to the isolate's susceptibility test results, standart therapeutic protocols are always needed since second-line anti-TB drug susceptibility testing generally could not be performed in developing countries like Turkey. For this reason, nationwide and regional surveillance studies to determine the resistance patterns are always needed to make decisions about the standard therapy algorithms. In this study, it was aimed to investigate the presence of extensive drug resistance among 81 MDR-TB isolates obtained from various health care facilities from Istanbul, Izmir and Manisa and to determine the XDR-TB incidence in Marmara and Aegean regions. Furthermore, we aimed to provide epidemiological data to clinicians to support their choice of second-line anti-TB drugs for MDR-TB infections. Susceptibility testing of isolates for the first and the second-line anti-TB drugs were performed by using modified Middlebrook 7H9 broth in fluorometric BACTEC MGIT 960 system (Becton Dickinson, USA). Eighty-one MDR-TB isolates included in this study were isolated from 43 (53.1%) patients residing in Istanbul, 26 (32.1%) in Izmir and 12 (14.8%) in Manisa provinces. We could not find any isolate consistent with XDR-TB definition in this study. Second-line drug resistance rates of MDR-TB isolates to amikacin and kanamycin were 1.2%, ofloxacin and levofloxacin were 2.5%, capreomycin was 14.8%, ethionamide was 37% whereas linezolid resistance was not detected. Statistically significant correlation was detected between resistance rates of these antibiotic pairs; levofloxacin-ofloxacin (p< 0.01), amikacin-kanamycin (p= 0.01) and streptomycin-ethionamide (p= 0.04). In our study, extensive drug resistance was not encountered in any MDR-TB isolates while high resistance rates was observed against ethionamide and capreomycin. It can be concluded that parenteral aminoglycosides amikasin and kanamycin, fluoroquinolones and linezolid seemed to be reliable anti-TB agents in MDR-TB treatment, however, further larger scale studies are needed.