The increasing emergence of multi-drug resistant Acinetobacter baumannii strains as nosocomial pathogens lead to the use of antimicrobial combinations in the treatment of infections due to these bacteria. The aim of this study was to determine the MIC values of colistin and ampicillin/sulbactam and their in vitro synergistic activities by E-test in order to evaluate the effect of this combination against imipenem-resistant A.baumannii isolates. A total of 33 A.baumannii strains isolated from clinical specimens as etiologic agents of nosocomial infections and identified as imipenem-resistant were included in the study. Identification of the isolates was performed by conventional methods and their imipenem resistance was detected with BD Phoenix automated system (Becton Dickinson, USA). MIC values and in vitro synergistic activity of colistin and ampicillin/sulbactam combination were analyzed by E-test (AB Biodisk, Sweden) on Mueller-Hinton agar medium. Synergistic, additive, indifferent and antagonist effects of A.baumannii strains were evaluated by fractional inhibitory concentration (FIC) index. The combination was considered to be synergistic when the FIC index was </= 0.5, additive when it was 1- > 0.5 and antagonistic when >/= 2. Of the 33 strains included in the study, 21 were resistant to colistin; 30 were resistant and 3 were moderately susceptible to ampicillin/sulbactam. MIC50 and MIC90 values and MIC range of A.baumannii strains for colistin were 8, 32 and 0.13-128 microg/ml; for ampicillin/sulbactam those values were 48, 256 and 12-256 microg/ml, respectively. According to the FIC indices, 15 strains showed synergistic, four additive, five indifferent and nine antagonistic activity to colistin and ampicillin/sulbactam combination. Among the 12 colistin-susceptible strains, nine showed antagonistic, two indifferent and one synergistic activity to the tested combination while among the 21 colistin-resistant strains 14 showed synergistic, four additive and three indifferent activity. As a result, the combination of colistin with ampicillin/sulbactam, demonstrated high synergistic activity in vitro. While the synergistic effect of this combination was more significant in colistin-resistant strains, antagonistic effect of colistin-susceptible strains was found to be notable. Therefore, colistin resistance should be primarily determined before using colistin and ampicillin/sulbactam combination in A.baumannii infections since this combination seemed to be more effective in case of colistin resistance. However, these data should be supported by further advanced clinical studies.