Shigella is one of the most important causative agents of diarrhea especially in childhood. Since man is the main reservoir of Shigella and human to human transmission is possible, Shigella can easily spread in public and cause outbreaks. In this study, a total of 60 Shigella strains isolated in Ankara, Turkey by years 2001, 2008 and 2009 were investigated by their antimicrobial susceptibility profiles, plasmid profile analysis (PPA) and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). For epidemiological investigation, the results obtained by antibiotic resistance typing (ART) which was the phenotyping method, was compared to the results of the genotyping methods which were PPA and PFGE. Of the isolates 49 (81.6%) were S.sonnei, 10 (16.6%) were S.flexneri and one was (1.6%) S.dysenteriae. Antimicrobial susceptibilities were evaluated by disc diffusion method and the highest resistance rates were found against trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (91.6%), followed by tetracycline (68.3%) and ampicillin (26.6%). Resistance against ampicillin, chloramphenicol and amoxycillin/clavulanic acid were found higher in S.flexneri isolates than S.sonnei (p< 0.001). All isolates were found to be susceptible to ciprofloxacin, gentamicin and ceftazidime. S.sonnei demonstrated 12 and S.flexneri demonstrated 4 antibiotic resistance models. All isolates were carrying plasmids with varying sizes and varying numbers between 1 to 7. S.sonnei isolates demonstrated 27 and S.flexneri isolates demonstrated 8 plasmid profiles. S.sonnei isolates were clustered in 4 patterns and S.flexneri were clustered in 5 patterns by PFGE. This method demonstrated obvious clonal similarity among S.sonnei strains isolated in Ankara and discriminative power (DP) was calculated as 0.26. PPA and ART demonstrated higher DP among S.sonnei strains (0.97 and 0.75, respectively). In this study gain or loss of instable genetic mobile elements were thought to be responsible for higher discriminative powers of PPA and ART methods. These typing methods were found to be appropriate for the epidemiological investigation of strains collected in a short time period. PFGE was found to be convenient for the evaluation of clonal relatedness of the strains, however, in such geographical areas where the same clone was in circulation, use of ART and/or PPA together with PFGE would be useful for precise discrimination of Shigella strains.