Screening the anticoccidial drug targets is very important for developing novel drugs and revealing the molecular basis of drug resistance in coccidia. Due to high effectivity and safety, diclazuril was used widely in the poultry industry. To assess the roles of the serine/threonine protein phosphatase type 5 of second-generation merozoites in Eimeria tenella (EtPP5) in the anticoccidial activity of diclazuril against chicken coccidiosis, EtPP5 was cloned using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and rapid amplification of cDNA ends. Ultrastructural changes in second-generation merozoites and mRNA expression level of EtPP5 were monitored by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and quantitative real-time PCR, respectively. The results showed that the full length of the cloned EtPP5 cDNA (2,495 bp) encompassed a 1,647-bp open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 548 residues with an estimated molecular mass of 60.82 kDa and a theoretical isoelectric point of 5.89. Molecular analysis of EtPP5 reveals the presence of a C-terminal phosphatase domain and an extended N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat motif, a typical feature of protein phosphatases. The cDNA sequence has been submitted to the GenBank database with accession number JX987508. EtPP5 shared 89% homology with the published sequence of a PP5 ortholog of Toxoplasma gondii at the amino acid level (GenBank XP_002364442.1). TEM observed that diclazuril induced ultrastructural changes in second-generation merozoites. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed that compared with the control group, the level of EtPP5 mRNA expression was significantly downregulated by 51.4% by diclazuril treatment. The high similarity of EtPP5 to previously described PP5 of other organisms, as well as its downregulated expression and connection with apoptosis in the second-generation merozoites induced by diclazuril, suggests that it could act an important role in understanding the signaling mechanism underlining the diclazuril-induced merozoites apoptosis.