Haemonchus contortus infections have been increasingly reported in ungulates from cold climates even though past studies have shown that the free-living juveniles from this species survive poorly under freezing conditions. Overwintering strategies of H. contortus have not been documented in the Unites States Northern Great Plains. A PCR survey identified H. contortus as vastly predominant trichostrongyle species present (in addition to occasional detections of Teladorsagia sp.) in a closed farm flock of sheep from Brookings County, SD. Benzimidazole (BZ) and avermectin (AV) anthelmintics had been used intensely for many years on this flock. During the autumn season, three fecal egg count reduction tests (doramectin, albendazole, and moxidectin) were performed over a 4 year span to assess drug effectiveness within the flock. Significant drug resistance was found in Haemonchus adults with doramectin (69% efficacy), marginal resistance was found with albendazole (90% efficacy) and no resistance was found in moxidectin (100% efficacy). The following spring, pre-lambing and post-lambing fecals were obtained from albendazole and moxidectin treatment years to assess the resistance of the tissue-dwelling fourth-stage juveniles (J4s) at those times. Albendazole treated pre-lambing fecals averaged only 4 EPG and treated post-lambing fecals increased to 454 EPG, indicating that many of the J4s were not killed during the autumn treatment. Moxidectin pre-lambing fecals averaged only 1 EPG, and post-lambing fecals only increased to 6 EPG in the treated moxidectin population and 1422 EPG in the untreated moxidectin population. In addition to evaluating the ability of H. contortus to overwinter as drug resistant tissue-dwelling J4s, this study also evaluated the overwintering ability of pasture-dwelling, free-living third-stage juveniles at this farm. In the summers of 2010 and 2011, naive tracer lambs were placed on a H. contortus contaminated pasture for 3 weeks to assess J3 winter survival. In 2010, tracer lambs only averaged 7 EPG whereas drylotted control lambs averaged 2 EPG; in 2011, tracer lambs averaged 2 EPG while the control lambs averaged 1 EPG. These results suggest that at this northern plains farm, yearly transmission of H. contortus is predominately through drug-resistant J4s. This is consistent with other cold-climate, overwintering studies involving H. contortus from Europe.