CONTEXT: Public health has an important and critical role in responding to emerging multidrug-resistant organisms, such as carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention developed a survey as a tool for state health departments to determine carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae prevalence within their region. OBJECTIVE: This report summarizes an assessment of the health department experience with the survey, their perceived roles and responsibilities in responding to an emerging health care-associated pathogen, and potential barriers to public health engagement of acute care facilities in response activities. DESIGN: Key informant interviews consisting of open-ended and 5-point Likert scale questions were conducted. PARTICIPANTS: Interviewees represented state health departments that administered the survey and select states that did not. RESULTS: Of 11 states interviewed, 7 (64%) had administered the survey to acute care facilities. Despite similar competing priorities and concerns about administering the survey, different perspectives emerged among the 11 states; those that administered the survey regarded it as a learning opportunity, whereas other states emphasized concerns about survey logistics and other public health demands. All 11 states perceived the prevention of an emerging pathogen to be a public health priority, but the degree of their action depended on availability of resources and existing relationships with infection preventionists. Health departments had less interaction with other hospital personnel (eg, facility leadership) and limited knowledge of the roles and associated responsibilities of other health care partners (eg, Quality Improvement Organizations). CONCLUSIONS: Although considered a public health priority, response efforts to emerging pathogens were reported to vary among state health departments. A better understanding is needed of the factors that motivate and facilitate state health departments to engage in a public health activity despite the challenges of competing priorities and limited resources. Efforts should also focus on improving the relationship between health departments and hospital leadership and other health care partners.