OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, chemistry, microbiology, in vitro susceptibility, mechanism of resistance, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, clinical efficacy, safety, drug interactions, dosage, and administration of cethromycin, a new ketolide antibiotic. DATA SOURCES: Literature was obtained through searching PubMed (1950-October 2012), International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-October 2012), and a bibliographic review of published articles. Search terms included cethromycin, ABT-773, ketolide antibiotic, and community-acquired pneumonia. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All available in vitro and preclinical studies, as well as Phase 1, 2, and 3 clinical studies published in English were evaluated to summarize the pharmacology, chemistry, microbiology, efficacy, and safety of cethromycin in the treatment of respiratory tract infections. DATA SYNTHESIS: Cethromycin, a new ketolide, has a similar mechanism of action to telithromycin with an apparently better safety profile. Cethromycin displays in vitro activity against selected gram-positive, gram-negative, and atypical bacteria. The proposed indication of cethromycin is treatment of mild to moderate community-acquired bacterial pneumonia in patients aged 18 years or older. Based on clinical studies, the recommended dose is 300 mg orally once a day without regard to meals. Cethromycin has an orphan drug designation for tularemia, plague, and anthrax prophylaxis. The Food and Drug Administration denied approval for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia in 2009; a recent noninferiority trial showed comparable efficacy between cethromycin and clarithromycin. Preliminary data on adverse effects suggest that cethromycin is safe and gastrointestinal adverse effects appear to be dose-related. CONCLUSIONS: Cethromycin appears to be a promising ketolide for the treatment of mild to moderate community-acquired pneumonia. It was denied approval by the FDA in 2009 pending more evidence to show its efficacy, with more recent studies showing its noninferiority to antibiotics for the same indication.