The increased resistance of pathogenic microorganisms is frequently attributed to the extreme and inadequate use of antibiotics and transmission of resistance within and between individuals. To counter the emergence of resistant microorganisms, considerable resources have been invested in the search for new antimicrobials. Plants synthesize a diverse array of secondary metabolites (phytochemicals) known to be involved in defense mechanisms, and in the last few years it is recognized that some of these molecules have health beneficial effects, including antimicrobial properties. In this study, the mechanism of action of gallic (GA) and ferulic (FA) acids, a hydroxybenzoic acid and a hydroxycinnamic acid, was assessed on Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes. The targets of antimicrobial action were studied using different bacterial physiological indices: minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC), membrane permeabilization, intracellular potassium release, physicochemical surface properties, and surface charge. It was found that FA and GA had antimicrobial activity against the bacteria tested with MIC of 500 mug/mL for P. aeruginosa, 1500 mug/mL for E. coli, 1750 mug/mL for S. aureus, and 2000 mug/mL for L. monocytogenes with GA; 100 mug/mL for E. coli and P. aeruginosa, 1100 mug/mL and 1250 mug/mL for S. aureus and L. monocytogenes, respectively, with FA. The MBC for E. coli was 2500 mug/mL (FA) and 5000 (GA), for S. aureus was 5000 mug/mL (FA) and 5250 mug/mL (GA), for L. monocytogenes was 5300 mug/mL (FA) and 5500 mug/mL (GA), and 500 mug/mL for P. aeruginosa, with both phytochemicals. GA and FA led to irreversible changes in membrane properties (charge, intra and extracellular permeability, and physicochemical properties) through hydrophobicity changes, decrease of negative surface charge, and occurrence of local rupture or pore formation in the cell membranes with consequent leakage of essential intracellular constituents. The overall study emphasizes the potential of plant-derived molecules as a green and sustainable source of new broad spectrum antimicrobial products.