External laboratory proficiency programs are an important requirement for test quality assurance (EQA) and compliance to regulatory guidelines (Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments and inspections). The American Proficiency Institute (API) regularly distributes EQA sample challenges (test events) including an Educational Sample (ES) for antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Beginning in 2007, API has sent 3 ES samples annually, each a well-characterized (molecular/phenotypic methods) strain having an interesting/emerging mechanism of resistance. Hundreds of USA laboratories, usually serving small- to medium-size hospitals and clinics, participate in the API ungraded ES test event. Analysis of responses is made and reported electronically as ES critiques addressing contemporary susceptibility testing issues that affect patient therapy. Seven Gram-positive (+) and 8 Gram-negative (-) ES strains were tested over the 5 years (2007-2011) with organism identification (graded) accuracy of 95.3% (range, 91.0-99.2%) for Gram (-) and 97.0% (range, 94.2-100.0%) for Gram (+) challenges. Susceptibility testing categorical accuracy was generally greatest for the disk diffusion test (91.0/97.0%) compared to the MIC methods (commercial automated or manual) combined (89.9/96.1%, for Gram [-]/Gram [+], respectively). The most worrisome observations of these ES samples were as follows: 1) poor recognition of ESBL- and serine carbapenemase-producing strains (various types including Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapanemase) due to delayed application of Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute [CLSI] guidelines; 2) overcalling of ESBL in organisms having wild-type non-ESBL enzymes (OXA series; OXA, 1/30) due to commercial system or participant interpretive error; and 3) occasional drug-bug discords noted in nonfermentative Gram (-) bacilli. In conclusion, the API ES series of ungraded susceptibility testing challenges (accuracy was >90%) has been well received by subscribers and has provided detailed educational opportunities to improve laboratory testing performance. ES samples have delivered guidance to enable laboratories to rapidly comply with CLSI document changes of interpretive breakpoints such as those for beta-lactams when testing Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa; the program was sustained into 2012 and beyond to document quality of susceptibility tests in USA laboratories.