There is growing interest in breeding rheas (Rhea americana) in Brazil. However, there are no data on the yeast microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract of this avian species, and the phenotypic characteristics of these yeasts are not known. Therefore, the aim of this work was to isolate Candida species from the digestive tract of rheas and to evaluate the in vitro antifungal susceptibility and secretion of phospholipases of the recovered isolates. For this purpose, 58 rheas from breeding operations in the cities of Fortaleza and Mossoro, north-eastern Brazil, were used. Samples were gathered from the oropharynx and cloaca of the animals using sterile swabs. Stool samples were collected from their pens by scraping with a scalpel blade. For the primary isolation, the material was seeded onto 2 % Sabouraud dextrose agar supplemented with chloramphenicol (0.5 g l(-1)). The isolates were identified based on morphological and biochemical features. After identification, all the strains were submitted to antifungal susceptibility testing for amphotericin B, itraconazole and fluconazole. The phospholipase activity of the Candida species isolates was also tested by culturing on egg yolk agar. Candida species were isolated from at least one anatomical site in 36/58 birds (14/17 juveniles and 22/41 adults) and in 6/10 faecal samples. Mostly, only a single species was isolated from each collection site (36/56 positive sites), with up to three species being observed only in four cases (4/56). A total of 77 isolates were obtained, belonging to the species Candida parapsilosis sensu lato (19), Candida albicans (18), Candida tropicalis (13), Candida guilliermondii (12), Candida krusei (10) and Candida famata (5). C. albicans was more prevalent in the oropharynx of the juvenile rheas when compared with adult ones (P<0.001). All tested isolates were susceptible to amphotericin B, but 16 isolates were simultaneously resistant to the two azole derivatives (11/18 C. albicans, 1/10 C. krusei, 2/19 C. parapsilosis sensu lato and 2/13 C. tropicalis). C. albicans presented a particularly high resistance rate to fluconazole (15/18) and itraconazole (13/18). Finally, 23/77 strains secreted phospholipases. In summary, healthy rheas carry potentially pathogenic Candida species in their gastrointestinal tract, including azole-resistant strains that secrete phospholipases, and are prone to disseminating them in the environment. Thus, breeding and handling these animals may have some implications for human and animal health.