PURPOSE: Colistin, which had not been used widely because of nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity, has gained clinical importance in recent times due to the resurgence of multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli. Very few studies, especially pharmacokinetic studies, have been performed with intravenous colistimethate sodium, and none in India. The aim of our study was to study the single-dose and steady-state pharmacokinetics of colistin in patients with multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli infections. METHOD: This was a prospective open-label pharmacokinetic study done in an intensive care unit in a tertiary care hospital on 15 critically ill patients with proven multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli infection. Colistimethate sodium was injected as intermittent intravenous infusions in accordance with the recommendations on the package insert. For patients weighing >/= 60 kg with a normal renal function or with a creatinine clearance (CL(CR)) of between 20 and 50 ml/min, the drug was administered at 2 million international units (MIU) every 8 h; for those with a CL(CR) of 10-20 ml/min, the dose was 2 MIU every 12 h. Those patients who weighed <60 kg were administered 50,000 IU/kg/day in three divided doses at 8-h intervals. Both single-dose and steady-state pharmacokinetics of colistin were determined and correlated with clinical outcomes. RESULTS: A wide inter-individual variation was observed in pharmacokinetic parameters. The median (range) of the maximum plasma drug concentration/minimum inhibitory concentration (C(max)/MIC) ratio for Acinetobacter spp. was 13.4 (1.3-40.3) following the administration of a single dose of colistimethate sodium and 26.3 (0.9-64.9) at steady-state. For Pseudomonas spp., these values were 3.18 (1.6-23.1) following the single dose and 3.82 (2.3-10.9) at steady-state. For those patients whose cultures grew Acinetobacter spp., an optimum value of the C(max)/MIC ratio of >8 was achieved in seven of nine patients after the single dose and in seven of eight patients at steady-state. For those patients whose cultures grew Pseudomonas spp, only one patient after the single dose and one patient at steady-state achieved a C(max)/MIC ratio of >8. A significant association was noted between dose and survival, and a trend was observed with patients weighing </= 60 kg (who received 50,000 IU/kg/day instead of 6 MIU/day for those >60 kg) having an increased mortality. CONCLUSION: The pharmacokinetic parameters of colistin were comparable to those reported in previous studies in critically ill patients. However, the recommended dose may be inadequate to maintain the C(max)/MIC ratio to an optimal level-at least in patients infected with Pseudomonas spp. The dose recommendation should be based only on creatinine clearance and not body weight.