BACKGROUND: Chronic alcohol abuse causes oxidative stress and impairs alveolar epithelial barrier integrity, thereby rendering the lung susceptible to acute edematous injury. Experimentally, alcohol-induced oxidative stress increases the expression of transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) in the lung; however, we do not know the precise contribution of various alveolar cells in this process. In the present study, we focused on cell-cell interactions between alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells and the potential mechanisms by which TGFbeta1 may become activated in the alveolar space of the alcoholic lung. METHODS: Primary alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells were isolated from control- and alcohol-fed Sprague-Dawley rats. Expression of TGFbeta1 and the epithelial integrin alphavbeta6 were examined by real time PCR and either immunocytochemistry or flow cytometry. Alveolar epithelial cells were cultured on transwell supports in the presence of macrophage cell lysate from control- or alcohol-fed rats or in the presence of viable macrophages +/- alcohol. Epithelial barrier function was assessed by transepithelial resistance (TER) and paracellular flux of Texas Red dextran. RESULTS: TGFbeta1 expression was increased in alveolar macrophages from alcohol-fed rats, and TGFbeta1 protein was predominantly membrane-bound. Importantly, alveolar macrophage cellular lysate from alcohol-fed rats decreased TER and increased paracellular dextran flux in primary alveolar epithelial cell monolayers as compared to the lysates from control-fed rats. Alcohol-induced epithelial barrier dysfunction was prevented by anti-TGFbeta1 antibody treatment, indicating the presence of bioactive TGFbeta1 in the macrophage lysate. In addition, co-culturing macrophages and epithelial cells in the presence of alcohol decreased epithelial barrier function, which also was prevented by anti-TGFbeta1 and anti-alphavbeta6 treatment. In parallel, chronic alcohol ingestion in vivo, or direct treatment with active TGFbeta1 in vitro, increased the expression of alphavbeta6 integrin, which is known to activate TGFbeta1, in alveolar epithelial cells. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data suggest that interactions between alveolar epithelial cells and macrophages contribute to the alcohol-mediated disruption of epithelial barrier function via the expression and activation of TGFbeta1 at points of cell-cell contact.