BACKGROUND: The Study for Monitoring Antimicrobial Resistance Trends (SMART) has tracked the in vitro activity of ertapenem and comparators against aerobic gram-negative bacteria from intra-abdominal infections since 2002. This report describes the epidemiology and susceptibility for clinical isolates associated with appendicitis, collected from 2008 to 2010. METHODS: A total of 1,720 gram-negative bacilli were collected from patients with appendicitis in 122 hospitals in 39 countries worldwide; of these, 23% of isolates were from pediatric patients (</= 17 years old). Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) and extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) phenotypes were determined by broth microdilution and interpreted using Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines. RESULTS: The global ESBL-positive rate was 16.3%, ranging from 2.2% for Proteus mirabilis to 16.6% for Escherichia coli and 20.1% for Klebsiella pneumoniae. The ESBL-positive rates differed by age group (17.7% in adults vs. 11.4% in children) and by geographic region, with significantly higher rates in Asia/Pacific (28.0%) and significantly lower rates in North America (9.1%), Africa/Middle East (4.8%), and Europe (4.4%). Amikacin, imipenem-cilastatin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and ertapenem were the most active of the tested agents against aerobic gram-negative appendicitis pathogens across pediatric and adult age groups and across geographic regions, including ESBL-positive isolates. Cefepime and ceftazidime were active against >/= 90% of global pediatric isolates. E. coli, by far the most frequently isolated species (68% in adults and 75% in pediatric patients), was significantly less susceptible in adults than in pediatric patients (p<0.05; Fisher exact test) to all tested agents except amikacin, ertapenem, imipenem-cilastatin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and ampicillin-sulbactam (with the latter showing low activity in both age groups). CONCLUSIONS: These in vitro data suggest that amikacin, imipenem-cilastatin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and ertapenem would perform well against aerobic gram-negative bacilli associated with appendicitis in both adults and children, especially in regions with high rates of ESBL-positive E. coli.