A set of 80 Lactobacillus strains (36 Lactobacillus plantarum and 44 Lactobacillus paracasei) isolated from Spanish farmhouse cheeses have been studied as to their functional and safety properties and their survival under gut-related conditions. None of these 80 Lactobacillus strains were able to hydrolyse starch. A high percentage of L. plantarum and L. paracasei strains were, however, capable of hydrolysing casein (86.1% and 68.2% respectively). For the other characteristics investigated, L. plantarum strains generally had more positive responses than L. paracasei. The latter strains tested negative for most of these characteristics, with the exception of stachyose hydrolysis, which was positive in six strains of L. paracasei. A high percentage (91.7%) of L. plantarum produced haemo-dependent catalase. Phytase was present in 10 L. plantarum and in 2 L. paracasei. Most L. plantarum (83.3%) but no L. paracasei hydrolysed bile salts. All strains were completely resistant to a challenge of pH3, but many showed a loss of viability after a subsequent exposure to 0.3% oxgall; in fact, only one L. paracasei strain and 33 L. plantarum strains (91.67%) were tolerant to both stresses. L. plantarum Mb25 and L. plantarum Mb26 were the most adherent to Caco-2 cells (adherence percentages of 36 and 7% respectively). These two strains were also the most adherent to HeLa 229 cells, with 19.3 and 16.0% adhesion respectively. The Mb26 strain inhibited the adhesion of Listeria monocytogenes to Caco-2 cells when added simultaneously to Listeria and also when added 1h before the pathogen (21.0% and 51.6% adhesion inhibition, respectively). Production of H2O2 was detected in 38.9% of L. plantarum strains and in 9.1% of L. paracasei. Twelve L. plantarum and eight L. paracasei strains produced bacteriocin-like inhibitors. PCR amplifications of several plantaricin genes suggest that all the bacteriocinogenic strains may produce plantaricin E/F and some may also manufacture the plantaricin J/K. The nine L. plantarum strains assayed for antibiotic resistance were resistant to ciprofloxacin (MIC>2 mug/ml), vancomycin (MIC>16 mug/ml), and teicoplanin (MIC>16 mug/ml). Moreover, some strains showed intermediate resistance to penicillin, tetracycline, rifampicin, and levofloxacin. We conclude that farmhouse cheeses are good sources of biotechnologically relevant lactobacilli and that the L. plantarum species shows better biotechnological properties than L. paracasei. This can be deduced from the finding of a high percentage of strains of L. plantarum that exhibit remarkable functional and inhibitory properties and high abilities to survive in gut-related conditions, which can be further developed for biotechnological applications.