Riemerella anatipestifer (RA) is one of the most important pathogens of 1- to 8-wk-old ducklings that severely affects the development of the duck industry in China. Every year, antibiotic medicines including tetracycline and doxycycline are used in the duck industry. Few reports compare the expression of multidrug-resistant genes in RA before and after addition of chemical drugs. With this in mind, the direct effects of gradient concentration of tetracyclines on the expression of tetracycline resistance genes (TETr) in RA at the cDNA level were studied by using a quantitative real-time PCR method. The expression of TETr, tetA, tetC, and tetM was investigated in ATCC11845 and in 30 RA isolated from different samples. Using a range of doxycycline concentrations up to 50% of the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), the optimal induction concentration of 0.0625 mug/mL was selected. Under the optimal inducible expression, concentrations of TETr, tetC, and tetM cDNA were detected in all isolates, and the highest mRNA expression level of TETr genes was shown. Additionally, the expression levels of 3 TETr genes in RA14 (tetA and tetC) and RA17 (tetM and tetC) were compared. Both tetC and tetA found in isolate RA14 was found to express both tetC and tetA, and tetC cDNA was detected in isolate RA17 at all doxycycline concentrations tested, whereas tetM cDNA was not detected at any concentration. We can conclude that resistance pump is the main mechanism of tetracycline antibiotic resistance, and under the action of drug resistance pump tetC, the expression of tetM was not activated in RA17. These data suggest that the mRNA expression level of TETr genes was correlated with the MIC values, indicating that the degree of drug resistance is determined by the expression levels of TETr genes. Also, the induction of TETr is the major tetracycline resistance mechanism in RA, especially the resistance pump. However, lower concentrations of doxycycline induced higher TETr expression, and higher concentrations inhibited TETr expression. Maybe that is the reason for selection mutation to make tolerated bacteria survive.