INTRODUCTION: It has been demonstrated previously that the identification of bactibilia during cholecystectomy is associated with the presence of one or more risk factors: acute cholecystitis, common duct stones, emergency surgery, intraoperative findings and age >70 years. Current evidence-based guidance on antibiotic prophylaxis during laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is based on elective procedures and does not take into account these factors. The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of a selective antibiotic prophylaxis policy limited to high risk patients undergoing LC with the development of port site infections as the primary endpoint. METHODS: One hundred consecutive patients undergoing LC under the care of a single consultant surgeon during a one-year period were studied prospectively. Data collected included patient demographics (age, sex) as well as details of the history of gallstone disease to determine those with complex disease and risk factors for bactibilia. A single dose of antibiotics (second generation cephalosporin and metronidazole) was administered on induction to patients with a risk factor present. Information relating to all radiologically or microbiologically confirmed infections was documented. RESULTS: Eighty-four of the patients were female and the mean age was 47.7 +/-16.0 years. Nineteen LCs were performed as emergencies and the remainder were elective procedures. A risk factor for bactibilia was present in 35 patients. A wound infection was identified in four cases, two of which were Staphylococcus aureus (one methicillin resistant), one was a coagulase negative Staphylococcus and one wound cultured a mixed anaerobic growth. Three of the infections occurred in patients receiving prophylaxis (2 staphylococcal and 1 anaerobic) at intervals of 7, 14 and 19 days respectively. One patient with a body mass index of 32kg/m(2) in the 'no prophylaxis' group developed a coagulase negative staphylococcal infection at 10 days. No intra or extra-abdominal abdominal infections were identified. CONCLUSIONS: This study has demonstrated that restricting antibiotic prophylaxis to high risk patients has no detrimental effects in terms of increasing the rate of infections in those with no risk factors. Furthermore, the act of not prescribing to low risk patients will limit costs and the risk of adverse events. It will also reduce the risk of resistance and clostridial infections in this cohort.