PURPOSE: Carbapenem resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii has become highly rampant, which has been ascribed to the presence of multiple carbapenemases. The objective of the present study was to prospectively investigate the presence of multiple carbapenemase encoding genes in clinical isolates of A. baumannii. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 30 imipenem resistant, consecutive non-repeat clinical isolates A. baumannii from a Tertiary Care Centre of Delhi were subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST), screening for carbapenemase production by modified Hodge test (MHT) and determination of minimum inhibitory concentration for imipenem by E-Test(R) . These were subjected to Real time PCR for blaIMP-1 and 2 , blaVIM-1 and 2, blaOXA23, 24, 51 and 58 using SYBR green-I. These were grouped together on the basis of their genotype as each isolate harboured multiple carbapenemases and correlated with their AST profile. Detection of the novel carbapenemase blaNDM-1 was performed by real time PCR using TaqMan probes on 14 isolates. RESULTS: Colistin appeared to be the most effective drug in vitro, followed by tetracycline and beta lactam/beta lactamase inhibitor combinations. All, but one isolate were positive for the MHT. All 30 isolates were positive for blaOXA-51 like gene as well as blaIMP-1 and blaVIM-1 genes. blaOXA 24 and 58 were not detected in any of the isolates. blaIMP-2 , blaVIM-2 , blaOXA-23 were present in 15, 6 and 14 isolates respectively. Grouping based on the genotypic profile did not correlate with susceptibility pattern. Nine among the 14 isolates also harboured the novel blaNDM-1 gene. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study from North India, which comprehensively detected the presence of multiple carbapenemases as well the blaNDM-1 gene. The presence of the novel gene blaNDM-1 indicated ability of A. baumannii to acquire new carbapenemase genes despite the existence of multiple carbapenemase genes. The present study confirmed the presence of multiple genetic mechanisms for carbapenemases production among the clinical isolates of A. baumannii in north India.