The opportunistic human pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus produces a massive number of asexual spores (conidia) as the primary means of dispersal, survival, genome protection and infection of hosts. In this report, we investigated secretory and cytosolic proteins of non-pathogenic bacterial species (mostly belonging to human microbiome) for antifungal potential against A. fumigatus, A. flavus and A. niger. Our preliminary results revealed that cytosolic proteins of E. coli DH5alpha were most active and the less toxic against various pathogenic isolates of A. fumigatus (the major pathogenic species), depicting a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 62.50 mug/mL, 62.50 mug/mL and 12.50 mug/disc using microbroth dilution assay (MDA), percentage spore germination inhibition assay (PSGI) and disc diffusion assay (DDA), respectively. E. coli protein was non-toxic against human erythrocytes at doses up to 1000 mug/mL as compared to standard drug, amphotericin B which lysed 100% of erythrocytes at a concentration of 37.50 mug/mL. Time kill analysis proved it to be fungicidal in a concentration and time-dependent manner. Scanning electron microscopic studies (SEM) were carried out to prevail what kind of damage it causes to A. fumigatus. SEM results reported that conidiophore (structures forming conidia) development was halted as a major consequence, reducing the number of conidiophores to insignificant values as well as alteration in their morphological attributes. This feature may contribute to the development of new prevention strategies against Aspergillus infections. Hyphal atrophy was also observed, evidenced by shrinking and flattening of hyphal walls and reduced, abrupt hyphal branching. Such actions may effectively reduce the invasive ability of Aspergillus as well as it can sterilize the fungal burden by obstructing the conidiation pathway of A. fumigatus. Hence, E. coli DH5alpha, being a commensal species, can lead to the development of antifungal molecule with novel targets in fungal metabolism, which will help in combating the antifungal resistance and toxicity associated with current therapy.