The effect of preillumination with low intensity (10mumol quanta m(-2)s(-1), 10min) light of different wavelengths in the spectral range of 550-730nm on photosynthesis and activity of PSII, the content of photosynthetic pigments and H2O2, as well as the peroxidase activity in the leaves of 26-d-old Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type (WT) plants in response to UV-A radiation was studied. UV-A decreased the activity of the PSII, the content of Chl a, Chl b and carotenoids, as well as increased the peroxidase activity and H2O2 level in the WT leaves. Preillumination of the leaves with red light (RL, lambdamax=664nm) reduced the inhibitory effect of UV radiation on photosynthesis and activity of the PSII, indicated by delayed light emission as well as the H2O2 level, but increased the peroxidase activity in the leaves compared to illumination by UV radiation only. Illumination with RL alone and the subsequent exposure of plants to darkness increased the peroxidase activity and the transcription activity of genes of the transcription factors APX1 and HYH. Preillumination of leaves with RL, then far red light (FRL, lambdamax=727nm) partially compensated the effect of the RL for all studied parameters, suggesting that the active form of phytochrome (PFR) is involved in these processes. Preillumination with the wavelengths of 550, 594 and 727nm only did not have a marked effect on photosynthesis. The hy2 mutant of Arabidopsis with reduced synthesis of the phytochrome B chromophore showed decreased resistance of PSII to UV-A compared with the WT of Arabidopsis. UV radiation reduced Chl a fluorescence much faster in the hy2 mutant compared to the WT. Preillumination of the hy2 mutant with RL did not affect the PSII activity and H2O2 level in UV-irradiated leaves. It is assumed that the formation of the increased resistance of the photosynthetic apparatus of Arabidopsis to UV-A radiation involves PFR and the antioxidant system of plants, partly by inducing transcriptional activity of some antioxidant and transcription factors genes.