The present investigation was planned with the objective of studying the status of benzimidazole (BZ) resistance in gastrointestinal nematodes (GIN) of sheep and goats of different agro-climatic zones of sub-Himalyan region of northern India using in vivo faecal egg count reduction test (FECRT) and in vitro tests namely egg hatch assay (EHA) and larval development assay (LDA). Out of fourteen flocks, FECRT detected resistance in eight flocks (two sheep flocks and six goat flocks) with FECR% ranging from 54.95 to 90.86. Pre treatment coproculture contained predominantly Haemonchus contortus, followed by Trichostrongylus spp., Oesophagostomum and Strongyloides, while post treatment coproculture results showed that only H. contortus survived fenbendazole (FBZ) (in FECRT) or thiabendazole (TBZ) (in LDA) treatment except in three flocks of Tarai region {one sheep flock (Us1), and two goat flocks (Ug1 and Ug5)} where BZ resistant Trichostrongylus were also detected. The GIN of those eight farms which were found resistant by FECRT were also detected resistant by EHA. Arithmetic mean and range of ED50 value of susceptible group was found to be 0.059 mug/ml and 0.037-0.096 mug/ml, respectively, and the same for the resistant group were found to be 0.119 mug/ml and 0.101-0.147 mug/ml, respectively. With LDA, the arithmetic mean and range of LC50 value of susceptible group was found 0.0030 mug/ml and 0.001-0.005 mug/ml, respectively, and those of resistant group was found 0.0105 mug/ml and 0.009-0.012 mug/ml, respectively. The values of Spearman rank correlation coefficient indicated that negative correlation was found between FECR% and ED50 and between FECR% and LC50 while positive correlation existed between ED50 and LC50 value and the p-values indicated that these correlations were statistically highly significant. In the present study, FECRT and EHA gave comparable results with regard to detection of BZ resistance in GIN in sheep and goats. Although with LDA, the threshold LC50 value could not be established as for EHA but LDA indicated the presence of low level of resistance in GIN of both sheep and goats. For effective worm control, regular monitoring for anthelmintic resistance is important to know the status of anthelmintic efficacy in a particular agro-climatic zone. The baseline information thus generated will enable timely management of benzimidazoles resistance in GIN.