UNLABELLED: Nosocomial infections caused by strains Acinetobacter baumannii strands are a growing clinical problem. The occurrence of multidrug-resistant strands is observed and that limits the ways of therapy considerably. The aim of the study was to determine the rate of infection and susceptibility spectrum of the species Acinetobacter baumannii isolated from patients treated at Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Hospital in Zgierz with particular emphasis on surgical wards. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The material consisted of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates were obtained from samples of materials from patients treated at Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Hospital in Zgierz from January to December 2011. Isolated bacterial strains were cultured at microbiological substrates. Isolates were identified to species using the VITEK 2 GN card (bioMerieux) and Vitek 2 automated system (bioMerieux). Susceptibility towards antibiotics of particular strains was determined by the means of AST NO 93 card. In the case of resistance towards carbapenem, the MIC was marked by E-test with Mueller Hinton substrate. The occurrence of MBL was verified by the means of disc system with Mueller Hinton substrate. RESULTS: We have shown that total number of Acinetobacter baumannii infections at hospital was 140 (10,31% of total results of cultures). Percentage of Acinetobacter baumannii infections at wards: Intensive Care Unit 48%, Surgical Departments 20%, Internal Diseases Department 16%, Neurology 13%, other wards - 3%. The susceptibility percentage of Acinetobacter Baumannii against antibiotics: colistin 90%, imipenem 64%, meropenem 43%, ampicillin-sulbactam 28%, amikacin 27%, gentamicin 24%, cefepime 9%, ceftazidime 7%, ciprofloxacin 7% CONCLUSIONS: Acinetobacter baumannii infections are a significant proportion of nosocomial infections. Most relate to surgical wards and ICUs. Acinetobacter baumannii is resistant against most antibiotics. The highest percentage of sensitivity demonstrated for colistin and carbapenems.