In vivo Therapeutic Efficacy Studies (TES) have been routinely conducted in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) for decades. Results from the last 10 years have contributed to update national antimalarial drug policies, to identify hotspots of multi-drug resistance and from 2008 onwards, to stimulate ambitious multi-country programs and innovative research projects to contain and eliminate artemisinin resistant Plasmodium falciparum strains in the subregion. This paper describes the results of TES of first-line antimalarials in six countries of the GMS from 2008-2010 using the WHO in vivo standard protocol. A total of 91 studies were conducted at 32 sentinel sites testing dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHA-PIP), artesunate+mefloquine (A+M), and artemether-lumefantrine (AL) against P. falciparum malaria, as well as chloroquine and DHA-PIP against P vivax. Overall, artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) remained efficacious against falciparum malaria with some exceptions. The 42-day adequate clinical and parasitological response (ACPR) for DHA-PIP dropped significantly to 73% (95% CI 53-87) in 2010 in the same hotspot area of western Cambodia known to harbor artemisinin resistant P. falciparum strains. Because P falciparum sensitivity to artemisinin is a major concern, especially on the Cambodia-Thailand border, attempts were also made to strengthen the monitoring of parasite clearance time elsewhere in the region and globally. The proportion of patients still blood-smear positive on Day 3 above 10% is considered a proxy indicator to strongly suspect the appearance of falciparum resistance to artesunate. This has led to substantial extra measures to confirm the suspicion and eventually set up interventions to eliminate artemisinin resistant parasites. Notably, increasing proportions (>10%) of Day 3 positives among falciparum malaria patients treated with DHA-PIP have been observed in western Cambodia, Myanmar, Viet Nam and China from 2008. Percent Day 3 parasitemia associated with A+M has increased along the Thailand-Myanmar border to surpass 10% at several sites, adding to the known pool of sites with 'suspected' artemisinin resistance in the GMS. Chloroquine remains highly effective against P. vivax except for northeastern and north-central Cambodia. TES results from this subregional-wide monitoring of antimalarial efficacy have influenced the changes of 1st line drugs against both P. falciparum and P. vivax in Cambodia, against P. falciparum in selected areas in Thailand, and pinpointed hotspot areas elsewhere that should be closely monitored in order to take action in a timely manner.