Evolution and spread of chloroquine resistant (CQR) malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum have posed great threat in malaria intervention across the globe. The occurrence of K76T mutation in the P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt) gene has been widely attributed to CQR with four neighboring mutations providing compensatory fitness benefit to the parasite survival. Understanding evolutionary patterns of the pfcrt gene is of great relevance not only for devising new malaria control measures but also could serve as a model to understand evolution and spread of other human drug-resistant pathogens. Several studies, mainly based on differential patterns of diversities of the microsatellite loci placed in-and-around the pfcrt gene have indicated the role of positive natural selection under the 'hitchhiking' model of molecular evolution. However, the studies were restricted to limited number of microsatellite loci present inside the pfcrt gene. Moreover, comparatively higher level of diversities in microsatellite loci present inside the pfcrt gene than the loci flanking the pfcrt gene are hallmarks of Indian P. falciparum, presenting contrasting evolutionary models to global isolates. With a view to infer evolutionary patterns of the pfcrt gene in Indian P. falciparum, we have adopted a unique sampling scheme of two types of populations (cultured and field collected) and utilized 20 polymorphic microsatellite loci (16 located inside the pfcrt gene and four in the two flanking regions) to disentangle between genetic drift (inbred cultured isolates) and natural selection (field isolates). Data analyses employing different population genetic tests could not straightforwardly explain either the model invoking 'genetic hitchhiking' or 'genetic drift'. However, complex evolutionary models influenced by both demography and natural selection or an alternative model of natural selection (e.g. diversifying/balancing selection) might better explain the observed microsatellite variation in-and-around the pfcrt gene in Indian P. falciparum.