PURPOSE: The increase in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections is currently a major health care problem. Vancomycin is still often the first-line anti-microbiological agent for treating such infections; however, a recent decline in efficacy of vancomycin in MRSA infections has raised concerns and accelerated the search for new antibiotics. The aim of this study was to establish a MRSA peri-implant osteomyelitis animal model for future testing of new anti-microbiological agents under typical MRSA infection conditions. METHODS: Eighteen randomised NZW-rabbits underwent a standardised surgical procedure with the insertion of a femoral bone implant. Animals were then divided into group 1 (MRSA inoculation, no antibiotics; M/N), group 2 (MRSA inoculation, Vancomyin; M/V), and group 3 (no MRSA inoculation, no antibiotics; N/N). The primary study outcome parameters were animal leucocyte count, animal weight, and animal body temperature at one, seven, and 42 days after surgery. Additionally, a histo-morphometrical score was established and adjusted to a modified histological Smeltzer score. RESULTS: Macroscopic and histo-morphometrical findings showed a peri-implant osteomyelitis in group 1 with both increased acute and chronic infection parameters in M/N, as compared to M/V and N/N, indicating that vancomycin treatment prevented typical morphological changes of MRSA peri-implant osteomyelitis. Similarly, there was a reduction in animal weight and increase in leucocyte count and body temperature in group 1 (each p < 0.005). Vancomycin treatment again resulted in significantly reduced leucocyte count and body temperature, and increased animal body weight. CONCLUSIONS: Here we have established a peri-implant MRSA osteomyelitis model that successfully combined clinical and laboratory outcome parameters of infection with histo-morphometrical results; this model appears to be valuable for future experimental use and therapeutic monitoring of new anti-microbiological MRSA drugs.