Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important nosocomial pathogen that causes opportunistic infections and hospital outbreaks. During October 2012, carbapenem-resistant P.aeruginosa strains with similar antibiotic resistance patterns, were isolated from specimens sent from the intensive care and plastic surgery units in our hospital. Thus a hospital outbreak was suspected. The microbiology laboratory database was retrospectively searched and all strains of P.aeruginosa isolated during the four month period, starting with the initial carbapenem-resistant strain in August 2012, was evaluated as a hospital outbreak. The aim of this study was to define the outbreak by investigating the clonal relationship between the strains, to detect the potential environmental sources and to evaluate the period of the outbreak, risk factors and the efficiency of infection control measures. The study was conducted between August-November 2012. Twenty patients with carbapenem-resistant P.aeruginosa (CRPA) positive cultures were included in the study. The control group consisted of 22 patients with carbapenem-susceptible P.aeruginosa (CSPA) positive cultures. The clonal relationship between 26 CRPA strains was studied by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). The PFGE results indicated that CRPA strains in our hospital were not related to a single clone, however, there were four major clones composed of four to eight strains. Logistic regression analysis indicated that the risk increased 15.7 fold (95% CI: 1.19-207.76) by the use of carbapenem, 76.8 fold (95% CI: 2.03-2901.30) by surgical procedures and 0.787 fold (95% CI: 0.63-0.97) by the duration of hospital stay. Surveillance cultures from health-care personel and the environment performed in course of the outbreak, yielded no growth of a strain with the similar antibiotic resistance pattern. The spread of CRPA has been controlled by the use of effective precautionary measures, regressing the isolate number to 0-1 strain/month. Since CRPA infections have high mortality and lack therapeutic alternatives, they should be regarded among the priorities of the infection control programmes. This study has enabled to test the effectiveness of the infection control program, to make plans for the possible future outbreaks and to train the staff.