Fungal keratitis, an eye infection with poor prognosis, is difficult to treat and can lead to loss of vision. Among filamentous fungi Scedosporium spp. rarely lead to fungal keratitis. Here we present a case of keratitis caused by Scedosporium apiospermum. A 61-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with the complaints of right eye pain and decreased vision after a foreign body trauma to the right eye. The patient was diagnosed as keratitis by biomicroscopic examination. Conjunctival swabs collected from both eyes were inoculated onto sheep blood agar, chocolate agar, eosin methylene blue agar and Sabouraud dextrose agar. Corneal scrapings from the right eye were inoculated onto the same solid media by "C-streak" method, and in brain-heart-infusion broth by immersion. While gram-stained smears of conjunctival swabs showed no significant finding, smears of corneal scrapings revealed abundant neutrophils and profuse septate hyphae. Fungal keratitis was diagnosed and topical enhanced amphotericin B (0.5 mg/ml) therapy was initiated with netilmicin sulfate and oxytetracycline HCl plus polymyxin B sulfate. At the 10th day of therapy a mold growth was detected in corneal scraping cultures and was identified microscopically as S.apiospermum. Based on the relevant literature, therapy was changed to enhanced topical voriconazole (2 mg/ml) applied hourly, plus systemic voriconazole administration. At the third day of treatment, reduction of epithelial defect and decline in the focus of keratitis were observed. In the following days, however, a progression occurred in the focus of keratitis and 5% natamycin ophthalmic suspension was added to the therapy. Since the patient did not respond to any of the medical treatments, therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty was planned; yet, the patient refused the operation and was discharged with her own request. As far as the local literature was concerned, this is the first report of keratitis caused by S.apiospermum in Turkey. Though a very rare causative agent of keratitis, S.apiospermum is generally resistant to antifungal therapy and often require surgical treatment. Especially in patients with predisposing factors, this organism should be kept in mind as a potential causative agent and relevant microbiological examinations should be performed.