AIM: To determine the distribution of the three common Trichostrongylus spp. infecting sheep and their resistance status on farms throughout New Zealand, using PCR. METHODS: Cultures were prepared from faecal samples from 70 farms while conducting faecal egg count reduction tests (FECRT) in lambs between 2010 and 2012. Trichostrongylus-type infective stage larvae (L3) were recovered from cultures, derived from untreated control and albendazole-, levamisole- and ivermectin-treated groups of lambs on each of the farms involved, and these were identified to species using PCR analysis of the second internal transcribed spacer region of ribosomal DNA. The species composition of the larvae present in cultures from the untreated control groups was examined across all farms to assess any potential differences in geographical distribution. In addition, the species composition of larvae cultured from the untreated and anthelmintic-treated lamb groups were compared to determine which species exhibited resistance to each of the anthelmintics used in the FECRT. RESULTS: Of 67 farms with Trichostrongylus spp. present, 42 (63%) cultures from the untreated control groups contained all three Trichostrongylus spp. and no significant geographical patterns in their distribution were detected. Seven samples contained only one species. Irrespective of the anthelmintic efficacy levels, Trichostrongylus colubriformis dominated cultures prepared from lambs following treatment with albendazole (99.1 (95%CI = 97-100)% of larvae) or levamisole (81.6 (95%CI = 75.3-87.9)% of larvae), indicating the presence of widespread resistance in this species. In cultures prepared from levamisole-treated lambs, small numbers of T. axei larvae were also frequently present (5.4 (95% CI = 1.3-12.4)% of larvae). Resistance to ivermectin was not found in any of the three Trichostrongylus spp. after PCR identification. Although larvae were identified, based on length, as being Trichostrongylus spp., for 24 of the 48 samples cultured following treatment with ivermectin, 100% of the larvae present were identified as Teladorsagia circumcincta. CONCLUSIONS: As in previous surveys, all three Trichostrongylus spp. were common throughout New Zealand and no geographical patterns were detected in the current study. On all farms where resistance to albendazole and/or levamisole was indicated (i.e. efficacy <95%), the species identified as being resistant was T. colubriformis. Even where efficacies were >95%, T. colubriformis still tended to dominate in post-treatment cultures. While this could reflect a lower susceptibility of T. colubriformis to these anthelmintics, it seems more likely to indicate the presence of resistant genotypes in these populations. Similarly, T. axei also tended to be present after treatment with levamisole, which likely reflects a known lower susceptibility of this species to these anthelmintics.