AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the microbiology of secondary bacterial peritonitis due to appendicitis and the appropriateness of current antimicrobial practice in one institution. METHODS: A 14-year retrospective single-centre study of 69 consecutive paediatric patients (age 1-14 years) with appendicitis-related peritonitis and positive peritoneal specimen cultures was conducted. Post-operative outcomes, microbiology and antibiotic susceptibility of peritoneal isolates were analysed in all patients. RESULTS: Escherichia coli was identified in 56/69 (81 %) peritoneal specimens; four isolates were resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanate, and one other isolate was resistant to gentamicin. Anaerobes were identified in 37/69 (54 %) peritoneal specimens; two anaerobic isolates were resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanate and one isolate was resistant to metronidazole. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was identified in 4/69 (6 %) peritoneal specimens, and all were susceptible to gentamicin. Streptococcal species (two Group F streptococci and three beta-haemolytic streptococci) were identified in 5/69 (7 %) specimens, and all were susceptible to amoxicillin-clavulanate. Combination therapy involving amoxicillin-clavulanate and aminoglycoside is appropriate empirical treatment in 68/69 (99 %) patients. Addition of metronidazole to this regime would provide 100 % initial empirical coverage. Inadequate initial empiric antibiotic treatment and the presence of amoxicillin-clavulanate resistant E. coli were independent predictors of the post-operative infectious complications observed in 14/69 (20 %) patients. CONCLUSION: E. coli and mixed anaerobes are the predominant organisms identified in secondary peritonitis from appendicitis in children. Inadequate initial empirical antibiotic and amoxicillin-clavulanate resistant E. coli may contribute to increased post-operative infectious complications. This study provides evidence-based information on choice of combination therapy for paediatric appendicitis-related bacterial peritonitis.