The blood-testis barrier and blood-brain barrier are responsible for protecting the male genital tract and central nervous system from xenobiotic exposure. In HIV-infected patients, low concentrations of antiretroviral drugs in cerebrospinal fluid and seminal fluid have been reported. One mechanism that may contribute to reduced concentrations is the expression of ATP-binding cassette drug efflux transporters, such as P-glycoprotein (P-gp). The objective of this study was to investigate in vivo the tissue distribution of the HIV protease inhibitor atazanavir in wild-type (WT) mice, P-gp/breast cancer resistance protein (Bcrp)-knockout (Mdr1a-/-, Mdr1b-/-, and Abcg2-/- triple-knockout [TKO]) mice, and Cyp3a-/- (Cyp) mice. WT mice and Cyp mice were pretreated with a P-gp/Bcrp inhibitor, elacridar (5 mg/kg of body weight), and the HIV protease inhibitor and boosting agent ritonavir (2 mg/kg intravenously [i.v.]), respectively. Atazanavir (10 mg/kg) was administered i.v. Atazanavir concentrations in plasma (Cplasma), brain (Cbrain), and testes (Ctestes) were quantified at various times by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. In TKO mice, we demonstrated a significant increase in atazanavir Cbrain/Cplasma (5.4-fold) and Ctestes/Cplasma (4.6-fold) ratios compared to those in WT mice (P<0.05). Elacridar-treated WT mice showed a significant increase in atazanavir Cbrain/Cplasma (12.3-fold) and Ctestes/Cplasma (13.5-fold) ratios compared to those in vehicle-treated WT mice. In Cyp mice pretreated with ritonavir, significant (P<0.05) increases in atazanavir Cbrain/Cplasma (1.8-fold) and Ctestes/Cplasma (9.5-fold) ratios compared to those in vehicle-treated WT mice were observed. These data suggest that drug efflux transporters, i.e., P-gp, are involved in limiting the ability of atazanavir to permeate the rodent brain and genital tract. Since these transporters are known to be expressed in humans, they could contribute to the low cerebrospinal and seminal fluid antiretroviral concentrations reported in the clinic.