BACKGROUND: Surveillance of antimicrobial prescribing, in order to control the increase in antimicrobial resistance, is recommended by the Guidelines for Antimicrobial Stewardship in Hospitals in Ireland. OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study is to determine the profile and activities of Antimicrobial Management Teams (AMTs) in Irish Hospitals by surveying hospital pharmacists. SETTING: Hospitals in Ireland. METHOD: A self-completion postal questionnaire was developed from a recent study conducted by members of the authoring team in the United Kingdom, adapted for the Irish context. It was issued to all hospitals in Ireland (n = 70). Differences in responses, using Pearson's Chi squared tests, were evaluated between public and private hospitals to determine whether the funding category had an effect on activities. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: (1) A profile of AMTs in Ireland. (2) The presence and content of antimicrobial prescribing policies and how adherence to the policies is measured. RESULTS: The response rate was 73 % (n = 51, 71 % public). 57 % (29/51) of hospitals have an antimicrobial management team in place with 93 % (27/29) having a Consultant Medical Microbiologist, 24 % (7/29) having a Consultant in Infectious Diseases and 69 % (20/29) having an Antimicrobial Pharmacist. There is an antimicrobial prescribing policy in place in 88 % (45/51) of hospitals responding. 80 % (36/51) of replies report that the volume of antibiotics prescribed is monitored, 47 % (24/51) conduct audits to measure appropriateness of all antibiotics prescribed and 43 % (22/51) conduct audits of appropriate prescribing of restricted antibiotics. Public hospitals were significantly more likely than private hospitals to review the volume of antibiotics prescribed (p = 0.021) and to audit the appropriateness of restricted antibiotics use (p = 0.003). A lack of resources was reported as the main barrier to antimicrobial surveillance by hospital pharmacists. CONCLUSION: Around half of Irish hospitals do not have an antimicrobial management team in place but most hospitals have an antimicrobial prescribing policy. Most AMTs have representation by Consultants and Pharmacists, but audit and feedback of antibiotic prescribing activities is limited. Significant differences in audit activities were found between public and private hospitals, with private hospitals performing less well.