BACKGROUND: Despite their widespread use, antibiotics have not been shown to improve chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) outcomes. We aimed to determine whether culture-inappropriate postoperative antibiotic therapy was associated with less quality-of-life (QOL) improvement following functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS). METHODS: This retrospective cohort study recruited 376 adult CRS patients undergoing FESS between October 1, 2007 to December 31, 2011. Patient demographics, comorbidities and medications were collected at baseline. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and clindamycin were administered for 2 weeks postoperatively. The antibiotic appropriateness was determined based on bacterial resistance profile of organisms identified during intraoperative culture. The QOL outcome was defined as change of 22-item Sinonasal Outcome Test scores from preoperative visit to 1-month, 3-month, and 6-month post-FESS. Clinically significant difference was defined as at least 0.5 standard deviations (SD) of baseline QOL score in the reference group. Mixed-effects regression models were performed. RESULTS: Seven percent of patients (n = 27) had culture-inappropriate antibiotic therapy, and additional 5% (n = 19) had culture-specific antibiotic adjustment. Compared to patients with culture-appropriate antibiotics, patients with culture-inappropriate antibiotics had significantly less improvement of QOL from baseline to postoperative 1-month and 3-month follow-up where the difference became clinically significant; patients with antibiotic adjustment had more QOL improvement from baseline to 1-month follow-up, but their QOL worsened at 3-month follow-up, and these changes were not clinically significant. However, all effects washed out at 6-month follow-up with no significant differences. CONCLUSION: Culture-inappropriate postoperative antibiotic therapy decreased short-term QOL improvement to a clinically meaningful level after FESS. Culture guided selection of antibiotics may improve short-term FESS outcome.