BACKGROUND: Transmitted drug resistance (TDR) can limit effective treatment options to antiretroviral-naive HIV-infected persons and increase the risk of treatment failure. Limited estimates of TDR have been reported from the South Central United States. OBJECTIVE: To describe the incidence of TDR in Oklahoma and to examine whether TDR rates have increased with time. METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study of antiretroviral-naive patients at the Infectious Diseases Institute, a large infectious diseases clinic in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, who had received baseline antiretroviral resistance testing. Mutations were screened using the 2011 International Antiviral Society-USA Drug Resistance Mutation (DRM) update, and categorized using the 2009 World Health Organization (WHO) Surveillance Drug Resistance Mutation (SDRM) list. RESULTS: Genotypic sequences from 428 patients revealed a 6.0% to 13.6% incidence of SDRMs between 2007 and 2011, though no progression in the frequency was apparent during the study period. Primary DRMs were detected in 12.6% of the sampled patients, most commonly involving nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs; 8.2%), followed by protease inhibitors (PIs; 3.5%) and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs; 3.3%). The K103N/S and E138A reverse transcriptase mutations were the most common DRMs identified, both present in 3.5% of patients. The L90M mutation was the most frequently observed PI SDRM (1.6%), while the T215C/D/I mutation was the most common NRTI SDRM identified (1.9%). This study was limited by the fact that the WHO SDRM list was last updated in 2009. CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of DRMs in central and western Oklahoma is similar to recently reported rates in the United States which lack data from this region. However, the frequency of second-generation NNRTI DRMs (4.4%) suggests the need to closely monitor epidemiologic trends for increasing resistance rates to individual classes of ARVs in order to predict the impact of TDR on therapeutic options.