INTRODUCTION: Tuberculosis is still a global health problem all over the world despite its mortality has been decreased with effective treatment regimens. Poor treatment adherence, acquired drug resistance, treatment failure and relapse are the major problems during the course of the tuberculosis treatment. Intermittent regimens have the advantages of reducing the side effects and the cost of the therapy and increasing the adherence, especially in resource-limited areas; and have been documented to be as effective as daily regimen in the paediatric population. In this study, we compared the results of 6-month and 9-month intermittent-therapy regimens with two drugs, given to the children with pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis at our hospital. MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred and fifteen patients with pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis other than meningitis, who had been given intermittent anti-tuberculosis therapy between 1986 and 2001, were evaluated retrospectively. Fifty one patients were given isoniazid and rifampin daily for 15 days, followed by the same drugs and doses twice weekly for a total of 9-months. Also, 64 patients were treated with the same regimen for a total of 6-months. RESULTS: Clinical recovery was observed in 75% and 79% of pulmonary tuberculosis patients at the first month of therapy in group 1 (9-month group) and group 2 (6-month group), respectively. Radiological recovery was noted between 0-6 months in 81% of the patients in group 1 and 86% of the patients in group 2. According to the clinical and radiological recovery times, no significant difference was detected between the two groups (p> 0.05). Similar results had been observed in extrapulmonary tuberculosis (p> 0.05). Follow-up periods ranged from 7 months to 15 years. There was no case of early relapse. Late relapse was noted in 4 patients, who had been received 9-month therapy (group 1). CONCLUSION: Six-month intermittent therapy with two drugs is as efficacious as 9-month intermittent-therapy in childhood pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis, other than meningitis.