BACKGROUND: Long-term use of nucleos(t)ide analogues can increase risk of HBV drug-resistance mutations. The rtM204I (ATT coding for isoleucine) is one of the most important resistance mutation sites. Establishing a simple, rapid, reliable and highly sensitive assay to detect the resistant mutants as early as possible is of great clinical significance. METHODS: Recombinant plasmids for HBV YMDD (tyrosine-methionine-aspartate-aspartate) and YIDD (tyrosine-isoleucine-aspartate-aspartate) were constructed by TA cloning. Real time allele specific locked nucleic acid quantitative PCR (RT-AS-LNA-qPCR) with SYBR Green I was established by LNA-modified primers and evaluated with standard recombinant plasmids, clinical templates (the clinical wild type and mutant HBV DNA mixture) and 102 serum samples from nucleos(t)ide analogues-experienced patients. The serum samples from a chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patient firstly received LMV mono therapy and then switched to LMV + ADV combined therapy were also dynamically analyzed for 10 times. RESULTS: The linear range of the assay was between 1x10(9) copies/mul and 1 x 10(2) copies/mul. The low detection limit was 1 x 10(1) copies/mul. Sensitivity of the assay were 10(-6), 10(-4) and 10(-2) in the wild-type background of 1 x 10(9) copies/mul, 1 x 10(7) copies/mul and 1 x 10(5) copies/mul, respectively. The sensitivity of the assay in detection of clinical samples was 0.03%. The complete coincidence rate between RT-AS-LNA-qPCR and direct sequencing was 91.2% (93/102), partial coincidence rate was 8.8% (9/102), and no complete discordance was observed. The two assays showed a high concordance (Kappa = 0.676, P = 0.000). Minor variants can be detected 18 weeks earlier than the rebound of HBV DNA load and alanine aminotransferase level. CONCLUSIONS: A rapid, cost-effective, high sensitive, specific and reliable method of RT-AS-LNA-qPCR with SYBR Green I for early and absolute quantification of HBV YIDD (ATT coding for isoleucine) variants was established, which can provide valuable information for clinical antiretroviral regimens.