OBJECTIVE: To analyze the drug resistance and drug resistance genes of imipenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (IRPA) strains isolated from burn wards. METHODS: From June 2011 to June 2012, 30 strains of IRPA were isolated from wound excretion, sputum, and venous catheter attachment from burn patients hospitalized in Guangzhou Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine. Drug resistance of the IRPA to 12 antibiotics commonly used in clinic, including ceftazidime, amikacin, ciprofloxacin, etc., was tested with K-B paper agar disk diffusion method. Metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL)-producing IRPA was detected by synergism test with imipenem-2-mercaptoethanol. Plasmid of IRPA was extracted, and it was inserted into competent cells, producing transformation strains (TSs). Drug resistance of TSs to imipenem and the MBL-producing TSs were detected. The genes blaIMP, blaVIM, blaOXA-1, blaOXA-2 and blaOXA-10 of IRPA and the TSs were detected by polymerase chain reaction. The drug resistance of IRPA producing MBL or OXA enzyme was summed up. RESULTS: The sensitive rates of the 30 strains of IRPA to the 12 antibiotics were equal to or above 60.0%. Six strains of MBL-producing IRPA were screened. Twenty-four TSs were resistant to imipenem, and 6 strains among them were MBL-producing positive. Among the 30 strains of IRPA, 6 strains and their corresponding TSs carried blaVIM; 20 strains and their corresponding TSs carried blaOXA-10; no strain was detected to carry blaIMP, blaOXA-1 or blaOXA-2. Two strains and their corresponding TSs were detected carrying both blaVIM and blaOXA-10. No significant difference of drug resistance was observed between strains producing only MBL or OXA enzyme, with the same high resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics and some degree of sensitivity to aminoglycoside antibiotics. Strains producing enzymes MBL and OXA were all resistant to the 12 antibiotics. CONCLUSIONS: IRPA strains isolated from burn wards of Guangzhou Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine are multidrug-resistant, and they mainly produce type B and D carbapenemases.