BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY: Neonates at risk for early-onset sepsis are started on antibiotics empirically. Antibiotic resistance to conventionally used antibiotics is increasingly being reported. Antenatal maternal antibiotic exposure in this setting contributes to low yield on blood culture drawn at birth, limiting the planning of antibiotics based on culture reports. A head-to-head comparison for selecting the appropriate antibiotic is one strategy. OBJECTIVES: To compare monotherapy with amikacin against piperacillin-tazobactum as an empirical therapy in neonates at risk for early-onset sepsis. DESIGN: Randomized open-label controlled trial with stratification and block randomization. SETTINGS: Tertiary care neonatal unit in India PARTICIPANTS: All consecutive inborn neonates delivered between 01 May 2009 and 30 April 2011 who were >/=28 week gestation and/or >/=1000 g birth weight with risk factors for early-onset sepsis. INTERVENTION: Randomized to receive either amikacin or piperacillin-tazobactum, after stratifying as asymptomatic or symptomatic within 1 h of birth. PRIMARY OUTCOME: Incidence of treatment failure to the allocated antibiotic defined as blood culture isolate reported resistant to the allocated antibiotic or progression of the illness, necessitating a change of antibiotic. RESULTS: Of 204 eligible cases, 187 were enrolled. Seventeen babies were excluded. A total of 128 neonates were stratified as asymptomatic and 59 as symptomatic. In all, 64 of the asymptomatic cases received amikacin and 64 received piperacillin-tazobactum, while 29 symptomatic babies received amikacin and 30 received piperacillin-tazobactum. Five babies had blood culture-positive sepsis, and 28 babies had strong suspicion of sepsis. There was no difference in the treatment failure in the amikacin group (3 of 93; 3.2%) compared with piperacillin-tazobactum group (2 of 94; 2.1%) (p > 0.01) and no difference in the incidence of second infection, fungal sepsis and all-cause mortality at day 7 and 28 between the two study groups (p > 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Monotherapy with amikacin as an empirical antibiotic did not result in a higher incidence of treatment failure in neonates at risk for early-onset sepsis as compared with piperacillin-tazobactum. Both antibiotics were effective in management of babies with early-onset sepsis.