AIM: The present review aims to discuss the last 10 years published data on the topic of the use of osseointegrated implants in diabetic subjects, particularly regarding the influence of antibiotics administration in the perioperative period. BACKGROUND: In the last decades, oral rehabilitation significantly has evolved particularly with the use of osseointegrated implants. Increased life expectation of population is reflecting in a greater number of diabetic patients who might require dental osseointegrated implants rehabilitation. Diabetes was considered for a long time as a contraindication for oral implant placement. In this context, the use of antibiotics is still a controversial factor when we correlate it to implant success rate. REVIEW RESULTS: Although 228 articles were initially selected for evaluation of proposed criteria, only 16 articles were considered valid. Among the 16 selected articles, only six articles represented clinical research that discussed the influence of the antibiotic in the success of osseointegration of dental implants in diabetic subjects. Five were retrospective studies and one a prospective research. CONCLUSION: Data favors the use of antibiotics without significant side effects but clinical investigations of the need of prophylaxis antibiotic or therapeutic antibiotics are still scarce. The lack of adequate methodology is one of the main problems of the current articles. It is important to emphasize that studies should present detailed methodology in order to allow reproducibility. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Permanent tooth loss is a pathological condition that affects millions of people worldwide. The possibility of successful treatment of edentulous areas through osseointegrated implants in those systemic compromised patients is a matter of scientific discussion. Although antimicrobial agents must be used rationally and carefully to avoid development of bacterial resistance, more studies are needed in order to support evidence regarding the influence of antibiotics in the success of dental implant surgery in diabetic patients.