This study aimed to evaluate prevalence, characteristics, genotypic diversity and antibacterial susceptibility of Escherichia coli encoding Shiga toxin 2f in domestic pigeons in different provinces of Iran. A total of 117 faecal samples were collected from pigeons and were subjected to molecular detection of stx2f. In total, 20, 25.8, 21.4 and 9% of pigeons from Tehran, Ferdows, Garmsar and Babol cities carried stx2f+ isolates, respectively. Of the 460 E. coli isolates examined, 43 were stx2f+ and most also carried eae (95.3%) and astA (97.7%) genes. Some of the stx2f+ isolates harboured cnf (9.3%), but all were negative for stx1, stx2 (other subtypes) and ehly. Most Strains (90%) were assigned to B1 phylogroup and possessed Intimin-beta. Fingerprinting of the stx2f+ isolates using either enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus sequences (ERIC) or random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD)-polymerase chain reaction revealed seven distinct profiles by each method, with one prevailing (65.1 and 46.5%, respectively). By the combination of methods, 10 profiles were recognized. Ten isolates from different profiles were shown to belong to O20, O78 and O115 serogroups, and eight were 100% identical in the stx2f gene sequence. The strains were consistently resistant to amoxicillin and lincospectin and commonly resistant to tetracycline (88.4%) and doxycycline (74.4%). Overall, the results indicate a limited degree of genetic diversity in stx2f-harbouring E. coli from pigeons. Significance and impact of the study: Carriage of stx2f gene tends to be underreported in pigeon Escherichia coli isolates because most routine genetic and phenotypic tests cannot efficiently target this gene or detect the toxin. Nevertheless, pigeons frequently carry E. coli strains that are stx2f-positive, and this situation is not limited to any distinct geographical area. The current results suggest that genetic background of stx2f-encoding E. coli is distinct from most Shiga toxin-producing E. coli strains. However, the factors that contribute to host preferences and pathogenicity remain unclear. These findings have public health significance that should be addressed in future research.