UNLABELLED: The mechanism of miltefosine-resistance in Leishmania spp. has been partially determined in experimental resistant lines; however, studies using clinical isolates with different miltefosine susceptibilities are still needed. In our study, we used a proteomic 2D-DIGE/MS approach to study different protein abundances in miltefosine-sensitive and -resistant Leishmania infantum chagasi isolates from visceral leishmaniasis patients with different miltefosine treatment outcomes. The high-resolution proteome obtained from these isolates showed 823 matched spots and 46 spots exhibited different abundances between the isolates. Out of these differentially expressed spots, 26 (56.5%) showed greater and 20 (43.5%) showed lower expression of the resistant isolate compared to the sensitive isolate. MALDI/TOF-TOF mass spectrometry allowed the identification of 32 spots with unique protein identification correspondent to 22 non-redundant proteins. Most of the proteins up-regulated in the proteome miltefosine-resistant isolates were associated with redox homeostasis, stress response, protection to apoptosis, and drug translocation. These differentially expressed proteins are likely involved in miltefosine natural resistance and suggest that the miltefosine-resistance mechanism in Leishmania is multifactorial. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is a serious disease with a challenging treatment plan requiring the prolonged and painful applications of poorly tolerated toxic drugs. Therefore, the identification of miltefosine, an effective and safe oral drug, was considered a significant advancement in leishmaniasis therapy. However, different sensitivities to miltefosine in Leishmania have been observed in clinically relevant species, and the biological mechanism by which clinical isolates of Leishmania acquire drug resistance is poorly understood. Our work aims to elucidate the mechanism of natural resistance to miltefosine in Leishmania by studying the isolates from VL patients who displayed different miltefosine treatment outcomes.