BACKGROUND: HIV infection and highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) can induce metabolic disturbances including lipodystrophy, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance, which are reminiscences of metabolic syndrome (MS). However, little is known regarding the magnitude of MS in Ethiopian HIV population. This study, aimed to estimate the prevalence of MS among HIV positive patients with and without HAART. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted at Hawassa University Referral Hospital, southern Ethiopia between February 2012 and April 2013. Data on demographic and anthropometric characteristics were collected from a total of 374 HIV positive participants (188 on ART and 186 on Pre-ART) using WHO stepwise approach. Fasting blood glucose, total cholesterol, triglyceride, HDL-cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol was measured. The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) and the National Cholesterol Education Program: Adult Treatment Panel III (ATP) Criteria were used to define MS. RESULT: Of the 374 study participants 68% were females, and 50.3% were receiving ART. Using the IDF criteria, metabolic syndrome was diagnosed in 25% of patients receiving ART compared to 22.5% of the ART naive group (OR: 1.14 CI: 0.71-1.84). Using the ATP criteria, the prevalence of MS was 18.1% in the ART groups compared to 15.6% in ART naive group (OR: 1.20, CI: 0.69-2.06). Patients receiving ART had significantly elevated Cholesterol, triglyceride, glucose and LDL-c levels but lower CD4(+) cell counts than the Pre-ART groups. Being a female, having BMI of at least 25, older age (i.e. age>/=45 years) and having total cholesterol of at least 200mg/dl were significantly associated with the presence of MS. Using the ATP criteria to define MS, taking d4T-3TC-EFV regimen was significantly associated with higher odds of MS. CONCLUSION: Almost a quarter of HIV patients on ART developed metabolic syndrome. Furthermore patients on ART had elevated lipid profile and glucose metabolism disturbance than the ART naive.