BACKGROUND: HIV infection and malnutrition negatively reinforce each other. OBJECTIVE: For program guidance, to review evidence on the relationship of HIV infection and malnutrition in adults in resource-limited settings. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Adequate nutritional status supports immunity and physical performance. Weight loss, caused by low dietary intake (loss of appetite, mouth ulcers, food insecurity), malabsorption, and altered metabolism, is common in HIV infection. Regaining weight, particularly muscle mass, requires antiretroviral therapy (ART), treatment of opportunistic infections, consumption of a balanced diet, physical activity, mitigation of side effects, and perhaps appetite stimulants and growth hormone. Correcting nutritional status becomes more difficult as infection progresses. Studies document widespread micronutrient deficiencies among HIV-infected people. However, supplement composition, patient characteristics, and treatments vary widely across intervention studies. Therefore, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends ensuring intake of 1 Recommended Nutrient Intake (RNI) of each required micronutrient, which may require taking micronutrient supplements. Few studies have assessed the impact of food supplements. Because the mortality risk in patients receiving ART increases with lower body mass index (BMI), improving the BMI seems important. Whether this requires provision of food supplements depends on the patient's diet and food security. It appears that starting ART improves BMI and that ready-to-use fortified spreads and fortified-blended foods further increase BMI (the effect is somewhat less with fortified-blended foods). The studies are too small to assess effects on mortality. Once ART has been established and malnutrition treated, the nutritional quality of the diet remains important, also because of ART's long-term metabolic effects (dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, obesity). Food insecurity should also be addressed if it prevents adequate energy intake and reduces treatment initiation and adherence (due to the opportunity costs of obtaining treatment and mitigating side effects).