OBJECTIVE: To induce Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) resistance with ofloxacin (Ofx) of stepwise increasing concentration in vitro, investigate stability to fluoroquinolone (FQs) antibiotic of MTB, and analyze the molecular mechanism and mutation specialty of drug resistance preliminarily. METHODS: MTB Standard strain H37RV and 24 clinical isolates susceptible to Ofx were selected and experimentally serially subcultured in liquid culture medium containing increasing concentration of Ofx and induced the drug resistance to Ofx. Variety of Minimal Inhibitory Concentrations (MICs) to FQs drugs were detected by microwell-MIC-test method. Mutations of quinolone resistance determining region (QRDR) of gyrA gene were sequenced and identified. Relationship of different mutation sites and drug resistant degree were analyzed. A total of 6 MTB clinical isolates resistant to Ofx and induced drug resistant isolates in vitro were serially subcultured in liquid culture medium without drug. Variety of drug resistant stability, including MIC and mutation of gyrA gene were detected. RESULTS: MIC values of 21 Ofx susceptible isolates after induction were eight times higher than before, which were induced to drug resistant strains successfully and also resistant to Lfx and Mfx. Hot mutations of QRDR of gyrA gene were detected by sequencing, except one strain. Mutation of codon 94 occurred in 60% (12/20) of the strains with mutations and corresponding value of 50% Minimal Inhibitory Concentrations(MIC50) was >/= 8 microg/ml. In all, 4 of 6 MTB clinical isolates resistant to Ofx harbored mutation of codon 90 (67%) , but the corresponding value of MIC50 was 2 microg/ml. After 21 serially subcultured in liquid culture medium without drug, MIC values of 6 clinical isolates resistant to Ofx were not changed obviously and mutations were also not changed. After 11 times serially subcultured in culture medium without drug, MIC values of induced drug resistant strains were also not changed obviously, but new mutations were detected in QRDR of 3 isolates. CONCLUSION: MTB strains resistant to three kinds of FQs antibiotic were obtained by induction in vitro with Ofx. Codons 88, 94 mutations of QRDR of gyrA gene were related to the high level FQs drug resistance of MTB. Drug resistant stability of MTB to FQs was strong, and it is difficult for MTB to resume susceptibility.