The purposes of this study were to investigate the intestinal carriage of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-harbouring Enterobacteriaceae (ESBL-EN) and associated fluoroquinolone resistance (FQ-R) in 120 hospitalised patients with antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, and to investigate a correlation between Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) infection and intestinal colonisation with ESBL-EN in these patients. Stool samples were screened for C. difficile infection by toxin A/B enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and for the presence of enterobacterial isolates producing beta-lactamases by plating on beta-lactamase screening (BLSE) agar. Recovered isolates were confirmed pheno- and genotypically for the presence of ESBL genes (bla CTX-M, bla TEM, bla SHV) by the double-disc synergy test and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) sequencing, and tested for the presence of topoisomerase mutations (gyrA, parC) and plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR) determinants [qnrA, qnrB, qnrS, qepA, aac(6')-Ib-cr] by PCR sequencing. ESBL-EN were detected in 44/120 (37 %) stool samples. C. difficile-infected patients showed a significantly higher frequency of intestinal colonisation with ESBL-EN compared to C. difficile non-infected patients (62 % vs. 31 %, p = 0.008). Of the 73 ESBL-EN recovered, 46 (63 %) showed high-level FQ-R [ciprofloxacin minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) >/=32 mg/L]. The largest group consisted of 21 bla CTX-M-15-harbouring Enterobacteriaceae (ciprofloxacin MIC >/=64 mg/L) with multiple topoisomerase mutations in gyrA and parC, in combination with co-carriage of aac(6')-Ib-cr. Most of them were Escherichia coli isolates belonging to sequence types ST131 and ST410. We found remarkably high rates of intestinal colonisation with high-level FQ-R ESBL-EN in hospitalised patients with antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, especially among C. difficile-infected patients. These data underscore the need for stringent infection control to contain this potentially infectious and multidrug-resistant reservoir.