BACKGROUND: The Gram-negative pathogenic bacteria Klebsiella oxytoca and Klebsiella pneumoniae produce the extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) and cephalosporinase enzymes and are the major causes of hospital acquired (HA) infections and epidemics in non-hygienic communities in the majority of developing countries. METHODS: The prevalence of multidrug resistance among 445 strains of K. oxytoca and K. pneumoniae isolated from clinical samples of patients with gastrointestinal infections over a period of 42 months in the hospital was recorded, along with the sensitivity patterns to 23 antibiotics, including third-generation cephalosporin and fluoroquinolone antibiotics, using the disk-diffusion method. RESULTS: Of 175 K. oxytoca isolates, 143 were ESBL positive and 117 were fluoroquinolone resistant. Of 270 K. pneumoniae isolates, 200 were ESBL positive and 195 were independently fluoroquinolone resistant. The HA samples yielded more isolates than the community acquired (CA) samples for each species. The K. oxytoca strains were resistant to cefepime, gatifloxacin, ciprofloxacin, ceftazidime, levofloxacin and imipenem, whereas the K. pneumoniae strains were highly resistant to ampicillin, norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin, ofloxacin, amoxyclav, ceftazidime, cefepime, cefixime, piperacillin and imipenem. The ESBL-producing and fluoroquinolone-resistant K. pneumoniae strains were more prevalent than the K. oxytoca strains in the HA/CA samples. The minimum inhibitory concentration values of the third-generation cephalosporins: cefotaxime and ceftazidime and the fluoroquinolones: ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin against both species of Klebsiella confirmed the resistance in the current/coveted treatment options. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with other bacterial infections had a relatively higher probability of infection with ESBL-producing and fluoroquinolone-resistant Klebsiella strains. The data presented here highlight the alarming state of Klebsiella infection dynamics in the hospital and adjoining communities.