OBJECTIVES: Ceftobiprole is a broad-spectrum cephalosporin that demonstrates activity against Staphylococcus aureus resistant to methicillin, including strains with reduced susceptibility to glycopeptides and lipopeptides. The addition of this agent provides a potential therapeutic option for difficult-to-treat infections. Synergy has been demonstrated between beta-lactams combined with glycopeptides and lipopeptides against S. aureus. This study sought to determine whether ceftobiprole was synergistic with daptomycin, vancomycin or standard-of-care combination agents (gentamicin or rifampicin) against methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains with varying degrees of vancomycin susceptibility. METHODS: Broth microdilution MICs of ceftobiprole, daptomycin, vancomycin, rifampicin and gentamicin were evaluated for 20 MRSA isolates. Combination MICs were additionally evaluated in the presence of subinhibitory concentrations of ceftobiprole to assess synergism. Time-kill curves for five representative isolates were performed utilizing combinations of ceftobiprole plus daptomycin, vancomycin, rifampicin and gentamicin to further quantify the degree of synergy for each regimen. RESULTS: Ceftobiprole plus daptomycin represented the most potent combination with a 4-fold decrease in MIC and synergy against all strains evaluated in time-kill evaluations. Additionally, binding studies demonstrated enhanced daptomycin binding in the presence of subinhibitory concentrations of ceftobiprole. CONCLUSIONS: The use of combination therapy with ceftobiprole may provide a needed addition for the treatment of Gram-positive infections resistant to daptomycin or vancomycin. Consistent with what has been observed with other beta-lactams, ceftobiprole increased bodipy-tagged daptomycin binding on the surface of S. aureus, potentially explaining this potent synergy observed in time-kill evaluations. More detailed evaluation of ceftobiprole is warranted to better characterize observed synergy.