Gonorrhoea, according to the latest World Health Organization (WHO) estimates in 2008, is the most frequent bacterial sexually transmitted infection globally, accounting for 106.1 million new cases among adults. Of those cases, 3.4 (3.2%) million were in the WHO European Region. In the European Union and European Economic Area, the incidence of reported cases was 12.6 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2011. The highest incidences were noted in the United Kingdom (37.1), Latvia (24.4) and Ireland (18.6). However, in Poland from 2000 to 2011 the reported incidence declined and was only 0.8-0.9 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2011, that might indicate a suboptimal diagnostics and incomplete case reporting and epidemiological surveillance. A study surveying the diagnostics for gonorrhoea and the case reporting system, including the local and national epidemiological surveillance, in Poland is recommended. The high resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae to nearly all antimicrobials introduced for treatment of gonorrhoea is an exceedingly serious problem globally. A few years ago the first extensively-drug resistant N. gonorrhoeae strains with high-level resistance to ceftriaxone, the last remaining option for first-line empirical monotherapy, were reported. Due to this emergent situation, in 2012 the WHO and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) launched a global action plan and regional response plan, respectively, to combat the spread of multidrug resistant N. gonorrhoeae. Additionally, an updated European guideline on the diagnosis and treatment of gonorrhoea, recommending treatment with ceftriaxone together with azithromycin, was published in 2012. Worryingly, no antimicrobial susceptibility data for N. gonorrhoeae strains circulating in Poland have been internationally reported in several decades. It is imperative to implement some regular and quality assured antimicrobial susceptibility surveillance for N. gonorrhoeae in Poland and the official Polish treatment guidelines (from 1970s) recommending penicillin G as first-line treatment for gonorrhoea need to be promptly revised.