UNLABELLED: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection is chronic and presently still incurable. Antiretroviral drugs effectively suppress replication; however, persistent activation of inflammatory pathways remains a key cause of morbidity. Recent studies proposed that purinergic signaling is required for HIV-1 infection. Purinergic receptors are distributed throughout a wide variety of tissue types and detect extracellular ATP as a danger signal released from dying cells. We have explored how these pathways are involved in the transmission of HIV-1 from cell to cell through virological synapses. Infection of CD4+ T lymphocytes with HIV-1 in the presence of an inhibitor of P2X receptors effectively inhibited HIV-1 infection through both cell-free and cell-to-cell contact in a dose-dependent manner. Inhibition of direct cell-to-cell infection did not affect the formation of virological synapses or the subsequent cell-to-cell transfer of HIV-1. During both cell-free and cell-to-cell CD4+ T lymphocyte infection, purinergic antagonists blocked infection at the level of viral membrane fusion. During cell-to-cell transmission, we observed CXCR4 colocalization with the newly internalized virus particles within target lymphocytes and found that the purinergic antagonists did not impair the recruitment of the coreceptor CXCR4 to the site of Gag internalization in the target cell. In a screen of a library of purinergic antagonists, we found that the most potent inhibitors of HIV-1 fusion were those that target P2X receptors, while P2Y-selective receptor antagonists or adenosine receptor antagonists were ineffective. Our results suggest that P2X receptors may provide a therapeutic target and that purinergic antagonists may have potent activity against viral infection of CD4+ T lymphocytes by both cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission. IMPORTANCE: This study identifies purinergic antagonists to be potent inhibitors of HIV-1 cell-free and cell-to-cell-mediated infection and provides a stepwise determination of when these compounds inhibit HIV-1 infection. These data provide a rationale for the development of novel antiretroviral therapies that have a dual role in both direct antiviral activity and the reduction of HIV-associated inflammation. Purinergic antagonists are shown here to have equivalent efficacy in inhibiting HIV infection via cell-free and cell-to-cell infection, and it is shown that purinergic receptors could provide an attractive therapeutic anti-HIV target that might avoid resistance by targeting a host signaling pathway that potently regulates HIV infection. The high-throughput screen of HIV-1 fusion inhibitors further defines P2X-selective compounds among the purinergic compounds as being the most potent HIV entry inhibitors. Clinical studies on these drugs for other inflammatory indications suggest that they are safe, and thus, if developed for use as anti-HIV agents, they could reduce both HIV replication and HIV-related inflammation.