A new generation of drugs targeting the non-structural (NS) proteins of the Hepatitis C virus (HCV) will substantially increase treatment success rates, reducing global infections. Amongst the NS proteins, the NS3 protease represents an important drug target, responsible for liberation of mature NS proteins from the nascent HCV polyprotein and suppression of host innate immunity. Despite this, the evolutionary stability of the genomic locus encoding the NS3 protease is poorly characterized in chronic HCV infection. To address this shortfall, we developed a high-throughput amplicon pyrosequencing protocol and utilised it to monitor NS3 protease coding-sequence evolution for over a decade in two patients. Although patient-specific evolutionary trends were apparent, the protease amino acid population consensus remained stable with a massive excess of synonymous mutations observed, confirming this locus is under strong purifying selection during chronic infection within individual patients. No evidence for continuous immune escape was detected. Additionally, both patients failed protease inhibitor (PI) therapy and protease sequence diversity pre- and post-therapy were also assessed. No baseline resistance associated variants (RAVs) contributed to treatment failure. Significant reductions in viral diversity were observed post-PI therapy, indicating a population bottleneck occurred. The genetic vestiges of this bottleneck were still detectable 18months after therapy discontinuation. Although significant enrichment of the Q80L mutation was observed in one patient, genetic and phenotypic data reveal no detectable RAV persistence post-therapy failure. Together this investigation provides a sensitive and reproducible high-throughput framework to interrogate viral sequence diversity at high-resolution, with potential applications for routine monitoring of treatment regimens. This study also reveals novel insights into the evolutionary processes that shape NS3 sequence divergence in both chronic HCV infection and post PI-therapy failure.