BACKGROUND: Quinolone resistance is a major global clinical problem. It primarily emerges in microbiota under selective pressure. Studies evaluating the incidence and risk factors for carrying quinolone-resistant bacteria in hospitalized patients treated with fluoroquinolones (FQs) are lacking. METHODS: We prospectively included hospitalized patients treated with FQs. Nasal, throat and rectal swabs were performed before FQ treatment, at the end of FQ treatment and 30 days later. A 'reference group' of patients not receiving FQs was also included to determine the rates of quinolone resistance acquisition not linked to FQ treatment. Prevalence and incidence of quinolone-resistant strains of nasal coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) and Staphylococcus aureus, pharyngeal alpha-haemolytic streptococci and faecal Escherichia coli, and risk factors for emergence of quinolone resistance in FQ-treated patients were assessed. RESULTS: Four-hundred and fifty-one FQ-treated patients were included, as well as 119 subjects in the 'reference group'. Emergence of quinolone resistance occurred in 110/213 (51.6%), 50/336 (14.9%), 53/290 (18.3%) and 46/336 (13.7%) of FQ-treated patients for CoNS, S. aureus, alpha-haemolytic streptococci and E. coli, respectively, significantly more than for reference patients for CoNS (23/65; P < 0.05), S. aureus (5/91; P < 0.02) and E. coli (4/84; P < 0.05), but not for alpha-haemolytic streptococci (15/70; P = 0.55). Emergence of resistance was not associated with the type of FQ received, the duration of therapy or the duration of hospital stay, but was associated with host factors such as immunosuppression and altered performance status. CONCLUSIONS: FQs received during hospitalization account for high rates of emergence of resistance to FQs in clinically relevant bacteria from human microbiota, reflecting the important ecological impact of FQs. Host factors outweighed treatment or hospitalization characteristics as risk factors for carrying quinolone-resistant strains.