BACKGROUND: Epithelioid sarcoma (EpS) is a high-grade malignant soft-tissue sarcoma characterized by local recurrences and distant metastases. Effective treatments for EpS have not been established and thus novel therapeutic approaches against EpS are urgently required. mTOR inhibitors exert antitumor effects on several malignancies but AKT reactivation by mTOR inhibition attenuates the antitumor effects of mTOR inhibitors. This reactivation is receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)-dependent due to a release of negative feedback inhibition. We found that c-MET was the most highly activated RTK in two human EpS cell lines, Asra-EPS and VAESBJ. Here we investigated the functional and therapeutic relevance of mTOR and/or c-MET signaling pathways in EpS both in vitro and in vivo. METHODS: We first examined the effects of an mTOR inhibitor, RAD001 (everolimus), on cell proliferation, cell cycle, AKT/mTOR signaling, and xenograft tumor growth in EpS cell lines. Next, we determined whether RAD001-induced AKT reactivation was blocked by silencing of c-MET or treatment with a selective c-MET inhibitor, INC280. Finally, we evaluated the antitumor effects of RAD001 combined with INC280 on EpS cell lines compared with either single agent or control in vitro and in vivo. RESULTS: Constitutive AKT phosphorylation was observed in Asra-EPS and VAESBJ cells. RAD001 suppressed EpS cell growth by inducing cell cycle arrest but enhanced AKT phosphorylation, which resulted in intrinsic resistance to mTOR inhibitors. In both EpS cell lines, RAD001-induced AKT phosphorylation was dependent on c-MET signaling. INC280 inhibited phosphorylation of c-MET and its downstream molecules, and decreased RAD001-induced phosphorylation of both AKT and ERK in EpS. Compared with a single agent or control, the combination of RAD001 and INC280 exerted superior antitumor effects on the growth of EpS cell lines in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Targeting of mTOR and c-MET signaling pathways significantly abrogates the growth of EpS in preclinical models and may be a promising therapeutic approach for patients with EpS.