Three families of lipopeptides (LPs), surfactin, iturin (including mycosutilin) and fengycin, produced by the rhizabacterium Bacillus subtilis have received considerable attention for their antimicrobial, cytotoxic, antitumor, immunosuppressant and surfactant properties. Among them, iturins and fengycins generally display a strong in vitro antifungal activity. In addition, surfactins are powerful bio surfactants, and although they don't show any direct fungitoxicity, they exhibit some synergistic effect with the antifungal activity of iturins. The aim of our work is to characterize mycosubtilin, surfactin and fengycin, for their ability to protect wheat against two pathogens, Blumeria graminis f.sp. tritici (Bgt), an obligate parasitic fungus responsible for powdery mildew and Mycosphaerella graminicola (Mg), an hemibiotrophic fungus causing Septoria leaf blotch, two of the most important diseases of this crop. In a first step, we measured the protection efficacy of a preventive treatment with LPs against powdery mildew on wheat leaves. At least 41% and 44% protection levels were obtained when surfactin and mycosubtilin, respectively, were sprayed on wheat leaves at doses corresponding to 4g.ha(-1) in the field. We also tested in vitro the impact of LPs on germination of spores. No direct antifungal effect of LPs was observed on Bgt conidia germination, irrespective of the tested concentrations. However, fengycin strongly decreased the germination of Mg conidia and also considerably delayed its growth. Mycasubtilin completely inhibited conidial germination and therefore also its growth while surfactin did not remarkably affect either germination or growth of this fungus. In a second step, RT-qPCR was used to investigate elicitor and priming effects of surfactin and mycosubtilin on the expression levels of defence-related genes. In non-infectious conditions, both surfactin and mycosubtilin induced the expression of two peroxidase encoding genes (POX2, POX381), however, the expression of LOX (lipoxygenase), AOS (allene oxide synthase) genes involved in the octadecanoid pathway, as well as of the pathogenesis-related genes PR1 was only induced by mycosubtilin. In infectious conditions, only surfactin induced the expression of these genes in response to pBgt, mycosubtilin did not exhibit any priming effect. Depending on the targeted pathogen and on the type of LP, these molecules could exhibit direct antifungal effect and/or defence induction, through either elicitation or potentialisation.