OPINION STATEMENT: Once easily eradicated with triple or quadruple therapy, Helicobacter pylori infection has become increasingly resistant to traditional first-line treatment regimens because of emerging antibiotic resistance coupled with poor patient compliance with completing the treatment course. Given decreasing H. pylori eradication rates, there is considerable interest in evaluating new antibiotic combinations and regimens, the addition of probiotics, and the development of new paradigms such as concomitant, sequential, and hybrid medication dosing strategies. Unfortunately, efforts thus far have not universally improved treatment responses, as promising early results were often not extrapolated to wider populations. This is probably due largely to regional variation in H. pylori resistance patterns. Ideally, the standard of care should be dictated by knowledge of local H. pylori antimicrobial resistance patterns and clinical success rates rather than by empiric extrapolation from the literature. Unfortunately, such knowledge is usually lacking in the USA. The expectation of a first-line regimen is a minimum 80 % eradication rate in the local population. Standard triple therapy with a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), amoxicillin, and clarithromycin may still be effective in some areas; however, in populations with high clarithromycin resistance, quadruple therapy with a metronidazole-based regimen may be a better choice, and concomitant, sequential, or hybrid dosing schedules should also be considered as possible first-line choices. Second- and third-line treatment regimens consist of levofloxacin-based and rifabutin-based therapies, respectively. Further work should be directed at establishing local resistance patterns and eradication rates, developing H. pylori-specific antibiotics, and starting culture-guided treatment programs. Ultimately, the development of an H. pylori vaccine would bypass any issues with antibiotic resistance by preventing the acquisition of infection altogether.