OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinical efficacy of gemcitabine concomitant with nedaplatin and drug resistance in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and associated molecular predicators. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 68 patients diagnosed with NSCLC by histology served as the study objects and were randomly divided into an observation group treated with gemcitabine concomitant with nedaplatin and a control group with cisplatin concomitant with gemcitabine, 34 cases for each group. Short-term and long-term efficacies, adverse responses as well as the expression of nucleotide excision repair cross complementing 1 (ERCC1), ribonucleotide reductase subunit M1 (RRM1) and lung resistance-related protein (LRP) in NSCLC tissues in both groups were assessed. RESULTS: The short-term objective response rate (ORR) and disease control rate (DCR) were 35.3% (12/34) and 76.5% (26/34) in the observation group and 38.2% (13/34) and 85.3% (29/34) in the control group, respectively, the differences not being statistically significant. The time to progression (TTP) in both groups were 1~12 months, while the median TTP was 135 d and 144 d, respectively. Though the survival was slightly higher in the control group, there were no significant differences in TTP and survival time. The rates of decreased hemoglobin, vomiting and nausea as well as renal toxicity were evidently lower in the observation group, while other adverse responses demonstrated no significant difference. The positive expression rates of ERCC1, RRM1 and LRP were 47.1% (16/34), 61.8% (21/34) and 64.7% (22/34) in the observation group, respectively. Compared with negative ERCC1 expression, ORR had decreasing trend and the overall survival time (OS) decreased significantly in patients with positive ERCC1 expression, which were markedly decreased by the positive expressions of RRM1 and LRP. CONCLUSIONS: Gemcitabine concomitant with nedaplatin has significant effects in the treatment of NSCLC, with an adverse response rate obviously lower than for cisplatin concomitant with gemcitabine, suggesting that wider use in the clinic is warranted. Additionally, the positive expressions of ERCC1, RRM1 and LRP may increase patient drug resistance, so they can be applied as the chemotherapeutic predicators to guide individualized therapy of NSCLC patients.