Melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) plays a crucial role in recognizing intracellular viral infection, activating the interferon regulatory factor pathways as well as inducing antiviral response. While the antiviral regulatory mechanism of MDA5 remains unclear. In the present study, CiMDA5 (Ctenopharyngodon idella MDA5) against grass carp reovirus (GCRV) would be initially revealed from the perspective of DNA methylation, a pivotal epigenetic modification. Two CpG islands (CGIs) were predicted located in the first exon of CiMDA5, of which the first CpG island was 427 bp in length possessed 29 candidate CpG loci and 34 CpA loci, and the second one was 130 bp in length involving 7 CpG loci as well as 10 CpA loci. By bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP), the methylation statuses were detected in spleen of 70 individuals divided into resistant/susceptible groups post challenge experiment, and the resistance-association analysis was performed with Chi-square test. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was carried out to explore the relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression in CiMDA5. Results indicated that the methylation levels of CpA/CpG sites at +200, +202, +204, +207 nt, which consisted of a putative densely methylated element (DME), were significantly higher in the susceptible group than those in the resistant group. Meanwhile, the average transcription of CiMDA5 was down-regulated in the susceptible individuals compared with the resistant individuals. Evidently, the DNA methylation may be the negative modulator of CiMDA5 antiviral expression. Collectively, the methylation levels of CiMDA5 demonstrated the tight association with the resistance against GCRV and the negative-regulated roles in mRNA expression. This study first discovered the resistance-associated gene modulated by DNA methylation in teleost, preliminary revealed the underlying regulatory mechanism of CiMDA5 transcription against GCRV as well as laid a theoretical foundation on molecular nosogenesis of hemorrhagic diseases in C. idella.