Antimicrobial-resistant organisms are regarded as a particular threat to the public health of the European population. In Germany the requirement for a national rollout reporting of positive laboratory test results for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in blood cultures was implemented in 2009. This was followed in 2011 by the introduction of a laboratory-based, rollout reporting system for the detection of gram-negative bacteria with acquired carbapenem-resistance (carbapenem-resistant organisms, CRO) in the federal state of Hessen. This article will present the experience gained in Frankfurt am Main with the existing reporting system. Blood or cerebrospinal fluid cultures positive for MRSA were reported from all Frankfurt clinics between 2010 and 2013. The objective of preventing nosocomial infections by introducing a mandatory reporting for MRSA in blood cultures was only partially achieved by the reporting procedure on a population scale. Instead, reporting on a clinic-based scale, i.e., incidence per 1,000 patient days should be used. Moreover, mandatory reporting of clusters of nosocomial colonizations with MRSA could be an appropriate measure for the timely prevention of nosocomial infections with these organisms. CROs were reported from nearly all clinics as well as the ambulatory setting. Different reporting criteria have resulted not only in a greatly varying workload for the institutions and the health authorities but also in vastly different numbers of reported events. Regarding the importance of CRO, mandatory reporting seems reasonable. Criteria of reporting should be simple and easily comprehensible, i.e., all 4MRGN (gram-negative bacteria with resistance against four antibiotic groups such as acylureidopenicillins, third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, fluorchinolones, and carbapenems) according to the German Commission on Hospital Hygiene and Infection Prevention (KRINKO) should be considered. Reporting and evaluation of multidrug-resistant organisms (MDRO) in a population-based system does not seem to be sufficient regarding these organisms with high importance for hospital hygiene; mandatory reporting on an anonymous clinic-based scale should be used.