INTRODUCTION: Tigecycline is an established treatment option for infections with multiresistant bacteria (MRB). It retains activity against many strains with limited susceptibility to other antibiotics. Efficacy and safety of tigecycline as monotherapy or in combination regimens were investigated in a prospective noninterventional study involving 1,025 severely ill patients in clinical routine at 137 German hospitals. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data on the full population have been published; our present analysis focuses on infections caused by MRB. The study population included patients with complicated infections, high disease severity (APACHE II > 15: 65 %) and high MRB prevalence. Most patients had comorbidities, including cardiovascular disease, renal insufficiency, and/or diabetes mellitus. Treatment success was defined as cure/improvement without requirement of further antibiotic therapy. RESULTS: Pathogens isolated from 215 evaluable patients with documented MRB infections included 132 methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 42 vancomycin-resistant Enterococci (VRE) and 67 Gram-negative extended beta-lactamase (ESBL) producers. Of the MRB subpopulation, 140 patients received tigecycline monotherapy, 75 were treated with combination regimens. High overall clinical success rates were recorded for MRB infections treated with tigecycline alone (94 %) or in combinations (88 %); in detail intraabdominal infections (monotherapy: 90 %; combinations: 93 %), skin/soft tissue infections (93; 100 %), community-acquired pneumonia (100; 100 %), hospital-acquired pneumonia (94,7; 72,7 %), diabetic foot infections (89; 33 %), blood stream infections (100; 100 %) and multiple-site infections (92; 71 %). CONCLUSIONS: Tigecycline achieved high clinical success rates in patients with documented infections involving MRB strains despite high disease severity. These results add to the evidence indicating that tigecycline is a valuable therapeutic option for complicated infections in severely ill patients with a high likelihood of multidrug-resistant pathogen involvement.