Thirty healthy subjects (15 males and 15 females) were randomly assigned in three groups and clindamycin (150 mg qid) or ciprofloxacin (500 mg bid) or placebo was given for a 10-day period. Skin, nasal, saliva, faeces samples were collected at day - 1, day 11, 1 month, 2 months, 4 months and 12 months post administration for microbiological analysis. Ciprofloxacin or clindamycin had no impact on the anaerobic skin microbiota and the proportions of antibiotic resistant anaerobic bacteria were similar as in the placebo group. Ciprofloxacin had impact on the Propionibacterium acnes in the nasal microbiota that normalized after 1 month, however, ciprofloxacin-resistant P. acnes strains increased at month 2 and month 12. Clindamycin had no impact on the nasal microbiota. In the oropharyngeal microbiota, a higher proportion of ciprofloxacin resistant Veillonella was found, it lasting up to 12 months post dosing. In the clindamycin group, clindamycin-resistant Prevotella spp. were found in increased proportions compared to placebo at various time points except month 4 in the saliva samples. The relative proportion of ciprofloxacin-resistant Bifidobacteria increased in the faecal samples on day 11, 1 month, 4 months and 12 months post dosing compared to placebo. The proportion of clindamycin-resistant Bacteroides spp. increased at 1, 2, 4 and 12 months post dosing compared to placebo in the faecal samples. No Clostridium difficile was recovered from any of the samples from any of the volunteers at any visit. The concentrations of ciprofloxacin or clindamycin in the faeces were higher than the MICs for most of the organisms present in the normal microbiota. No obvious correlation between the groups in resistant patterns for anaerobic bacteria was observed. In conclusion, based on the microbiological data of the microbiota as well as the results of the bioassays for ciprofloxacin and clindamycin concentrations in the faecal samples, oral administration of ciprofloxacin and clindamycin has an impact on the anaerobic microbiota and may have a long-term effect on the development and persistence of antibiotic-resistant anaerobes in the normal microbiota.