BACKGROUND: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is one of the most common causes of nosocomial infections. Resistance of P. aeruginosa to beta-lactam antibiotics may be the result of acquired resistance through mutation and over production of various antibiotic inactivating enzymes. This research aimed to determine the prevalence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) and metallo beta-lactamase (MBL) production as well as the presence of their related genes among AmpC beta-lactamase producing P. aeruginosa isolated from burns. OBJECTIVES: The current study aimed to determine the prevalence of class A ESBL and MBL production in relation to the presence of their related genes among AmpC beta-lactamase producing P. aeruginosa isolated from burns. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The antimicrobial susceptibility of 51 P. aeruginosa isolates from patients with burns was examined against 13 antibiotics by the disc diffusion method. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) for imipenem and ceftazidime were measured by the microdilution method. AmpC production was detected by AmpC disc and the modified three-dimensional extract tests. ESBL phenotype was confirmed by the double disc synergy test (DDST). Presence of beta-lactamase genes was detected by specific primers and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). RESULTS: All isolates were multidrug resistant. AmpC, ESBL and MBL production were observed in 35 (68.6%), 20 (39.2%) and 19 (37.3%) isolates, respectively. Overall, 43 isolates (84.3%) carried beta-lactamase genes, out of which 31 (60.8%) harbored bla AmpC , 20 (39.2%) had bla TEM and 11 (21.6%) carried bla PER -1 genes. Among the AmpC producers, two isolates (6.5%) carried bla AmpC + bla ESBL , 13 (41.9%) had bla AmpC + bla MBL and six (19.4%) produced the three enzymes. CONCLUSIONS: A high prevalence of multiple beta-lactamase production was observed among the AmpC producers (60%), of which the majority co-produced AmpC and MBL. The current study results showed correlation between beta-lactamase production and the presence of antibiotic resistance genes in the isolates.