Acinetobacter baumannii which is a significant cause of nosocomial infections, increases the rate of morbidity and mortality in health care settings especially in intensive care units (ICUs). The aim of this study was to determine the antibiotic resistance profiles of A.baumannii strains isolated from blood cultures of inpatients from different ICUs, wards and hospital environment and evaluate their clonal relationships and epidemiologic features. A total of 54 A.baumannii strains (47 from the blood cultures and 7 from the hospital environment), identified between 01 January 2012-28 December 2012 at the Clinical Microbiology Laboratory of Ankara Numune Training and Research Hospital, Turkey, were included in the study. Identification of A.baumannii isolates and their antimicrobial [sulbactam-ampicillin (SAM), piperacillin (PIP), piperacillin-tazobactam (TZP), ceftazidime (CFZ), cefoperazone-sulbactam (SCF), cefepime (CEF), imipenem (IMP), meropenem (MER), amikacin (AMK), gentamicin (GEN), netilmicin (NT), ciprofloxacin (CIP), levofloxacin (LVF), tetracycline (TET), tigecycline (TG), colistin (COL), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT)] susceptibility testing were performed by Vitek 2 (bioMerieux, France) system. The clonal relationship between the A.baumannii isolates was analysed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). In our study colistin, tigecycline and netilmicin were found to be the most effective agents against A.baumannii isolates. All of the clinical isolates (n= 47) were found susceptible to COL, however all were resistant to SAM, PIP, TZP, CEF, IPM, CFZ, MER and CIP. While 1.85%, 14.8%, 14.8%, 16.6%, 59.2% and 22.2% of the isolates were susceptible to SCF, AMK, NT, GEN, TG and SXT, respectively; 1.85%, 1.85%, 9.2%, 16.6%, 38.8% and 27.7% of the isolates were intermediate to SCF, TET, AMK, NT, LVF and TG, respectively. Similarly, all of the environmental A.baumannii isolates (n= 7) were resistant to SAM, PIP, TZP, CFZ, CEF, IPM, MER and CIP, and all were susceptible to TG and COL. The resistance rates of the environmental isolates to SCF, AMK, GEN, NT, LVF, TET and SXT were determined as 57.1%, 85.7%, 85.7%, 28.8%, 28.6%, 85.7% and 57.1%, respectively. PFGE analysis done by the use of ApaI enzyme revealed the presence of one major clone. Dendogram analysis indicated that environmental and clinical isolates were in the same clone indicating that the outbreak was possibly originated from the same internal ICUs. Our data emphasized that multidrug resistant A.baumannii isolates were quite common in our hospital, and enviromental cross-contamination throughout the year was confirmed by molecular methods. Despite the precautions such as continous education on effective hand washing, use of gloves and hospital cleaning, established in our hospital, this single clonal spread was attributed to staff shortage and poor adherence to infection control rules. In conclusion, for the prevention of dissemination of multidrug resistant A.baumannii strains and control of nosocomial infections, infection control strategies should be established and strict compliance to these rules should be provided.