UNLABELLED: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) transmission within the host is important for the pathogenesis of HCMV diseases. Natural killer (NK) cells are well known to provide a first line of host defense against virus infections. However, the role of NK cells in the control of HCMV transmission is still unknown. Here, we provide the first experimental evidence that NK cells can efficiently control HCMV transmission in different cell types. NK cells engage different mechanisms to control the HCMV transmission both via soluble factors and by cell contact. NK cell-produced interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) suppresses HCMV production and induces resistance of bystander cells to HCMV infection. The UL16 viral gene contributes to an immune evasion from the NK cell-mediated control of HCMV transmission. Furthermore, the efficacy of the antibody-dependent NK cell-mediated control of HCMV transmission is dependent on a CD16-158V/F polymorphism. Our findings indicate that NK cells may have a clinical relevance in HCMV infection and highlight the need to consider potential therapeutic strategies based on the manipulation of NK cells. IMPORTANCE: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infects 40% to 100% of the human population worldwide. After primary infection, mainly in childhood, the virus establishes a lifelong persistence with possible reactivations. Most infections remain asymptomatic; however, HCMV represents a major health problem since it is the most frequent cause of infection-induced birth defects and is responsible for high morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised patients. The immune system normally controls the infection by antibodies and immune effector cells. One type of effector cells are the natural killer (NK) cells, which provide a rapid response to virus-infected cells. NK cells participate in viral clearance by inducing the death of infected cells. NK cells also secrete antiviral cytokines as a consequence of the interaction with an infected cell. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms by which NK cells control HCMV transmission, from the perspectives of immune surveillance and immune evasion.