BACKGROUND: The prevalence of bloodstream infections (BSIs) due to ESBL-producing Escherichia coli (ESBL-EC) strains has increased dramatically over the past years. OBJECTIVES: Characterization of ESBL-EC isolates collected from BSIs with regard to their antimicrobial susceptibility and phylogenetic background. The conjugative transfer of resistance determinants to the E. coli reference strain K12 C600 was also investigated. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A collection of forty-eight ESBL-EC strains recovered from BSIs was subjected to the study. These strains were obtained from the ICU (intensive care unit) of the Medical University Hospital, Wroclaw, Poland, during a four-year period (2009-2012). All the isolates were screened for ESBL production by the double disk synergy test (DDST). Transferability of plasmid-mediated resistance genes was performed by the conjugational broth method. Susceptibility to antibiotics and chemotherapeutics of clinical isolates and transconjugants was determined by the agar dilution method. PCR assay was used to detect the blaCTX-M gene in ESBL-EC tested and transconjugants. Affiliation to phylogenetic groups was done by the triplex PCR method. RESULTS: Conjugational transfer of plasmids responsible for ESBL to a recipient strain was successful for all the ESBL-EC analyzed (donors). The conjugation frequencies ranging from 2.3x10(-7) to 5.2x10(-1) per donor. In vitro susceptibility testing revealed that all the ESBL-EC isolates and their transconjugants were resistant to most of the antimicrobial agents tested with the exception of carbapenems, tigecycline, and beta-lactam-clavulanate combinations. Moreover, all the donor strains and their transconjugants were found to contain the blaCTX-M gene. The majority of the isolates analyzed belonged to phylogroups B2 (62.5%) and D (25%), whereas groups B1 and A were less frequently represented (8.3% and 4.2%, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study confirm the need of antibiotic policies and effective infection control measures in hospital settings to minimize BSIs caused by multi-resistant ESBL-producing pathogens.