BACKROUND: Glycopeptides given intravenously achieve low airway concentrations. Nebulization of teicoplanin may be an efficient way of delivering a high concentration of this antibiotic to the lung. This multistep study assessed the feasibility of teicoplanin nebulization during mechanical ventilation by evaluating: the stability of its antibiotic effect; epithelial tolerance; lung deposition and systemic absorption in ventilated pigs. METHODS: Nebulized and non-nebulized teicoplanin activity was tested on Staphylococcus aureus cultures. The cytotoxic effect of teicoplanin on human respiratory epithelial cells was assessed by measuring lactate dehydrogenase activity released, cell viability, and transepithelial electrical resistance. Volume median diameter of particles of nebulized teicoplanin was measured by laser diffraction during mechanical ventilation. The deposited mass of teicoplanin nebulized with a vibrating mesh nebulizer in ventilated piglets was assessed by scintigraphy. Blood pharmacokinetics of teicoplanin administered either intravenously or by nebulization was compared. RESULTS: No decrease of antibiotic activity was observed after nebulization. In vitro cytotoxicity of teicoplanin was only observed with 1000 times the dose recommended for intravenous administration. Volume median diameter of particles was 2.5+/-0.1 mum. Of the initial nebulizer charge of teicoplanin, 24+/-7% was present in the lungs of ventilated pigs after the nebulization. Amount absorbed in blood was low (3.4%+/-0.9%) after nebulization, and blood stream elimination half-life value was 25.4 h. CONCLUSIONS: Teicoplanin was administered efficiently by nebulization during mechanical ventilation, without any effect on its pharmacological properties or any cytotoxicity. The pharmacokinetic parameters are promising in view of its time-dependent killing process. All the results of our multi-step study highlighted the potential of teicoplanin to be nebulized during mechanical ventilation.