Four-week-old mice, weighing about 25-35 g were divided into five groups (8 mice in each group): vehicle control, low- (0.5 g/kg), middle- (1 g/kg), high- (3 g/kg), and exceptionally high-dose (5 g/kg). After first and second weeks of intraperitoneal exposure to AgNPs, biochemical, histopathological, and electron microscopic ultrastructural changes were investigated. No significant changes were observed in SGOT and ALP levels after first week of exposure, while the level of SGPT significantly increased (p < 0.05) in 2nd week treated mice, indicating that inflammatory of liver might be induced by high-dose (3 and 5 g/kg) of AgNPs. No obvious changes were observed for UA and BUN in all groups of treated mice. However, significant (p < 0.05) decrease in CR level was noticed in all groups of treated mice only at high-dose (3 and 5 g/kg). No remarkable changes in lipid profile were observed. Light microscopic histopathological investigation shows that first week treatment had not perceptible effect on the cytoarchitecture on liver, kidney, and spleen; while, second week treatment had only sporadic mild effects on these organs. However, no ultrastructural electron microscopic changes were observed in liver, kidney, and spleen of mice treated with 0.5, 1, and 3 g/kg of AgNPs when sacrificed on first and second week; while, exceptionally high-dose (5 g/kg) of AgNPs resulted in slight nuclear chromatin condensation and irregularities in nuclear membrane. The results suggested that AgNPs could be well tolerated in mice when given intraperitoneally and no death has been found during the experiment in any groups of treated mice. Interestingly, significant (<0.05) decrease in glucose levels in all experiment group is suggestive of curious hypoglycemic role of AgNPs warranting further study to explore its possible therapeutic potential in hyperglycemic conditions as well as its mechanism of action at molecular level. (c) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Environ Toxicol 31: 945-956, 2016.