OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to estimate the outcome and response to platinum-based chemotherapy (CT) in patients with recurrent uterine papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC). METHODS: Patients with recurrent UPSC from 2000 to 2012 were included retrospectively. All patients received platinum-based CT for recurrent disease. Platinum-free interval was divided into less than 6 months (platinum resistant) and 6 months or longer (platinum sensitive). RESULTS: Twenty-two patients with recurrent UPSC were included. The median age was 66.5 years. The majority of the patients initially presented with advanced-stage disease (68%). A total of 84% (18/22) received adjuvant CT; all regimens were platinum based.The overall response rate (RR) and stable disease were 50% and 36.4%. The mean duration of response and stable disease were 9.4 and 5.6 months. Among the platinum-sensitive group, the overall RR was 64.7% compared with 0% in the platinum-resistant group. Among the patients who received prior adjuvant platinum-based CT, the RR was 38.8% compared with 100% among those who did not receive adjuvant CT. When stratified by platinum-based regimen, those who received the platinum-taxane regimen had a higher RR compared with those who received the platinum-gemcitabine regimen (62.5% vs 20%) among those who received prior adjuvant platinum therapy. The median progression-free survival and overall survival for the entire cohort were 8.4 and 24.9 months, respectively. The median progression-free survival was significantly longer for platinum-sensitive disease compared with platinum-resistant disease (10.2 vs 3.3 months, respectively; P = 0.002). Similarly, the median overall survival was longer for platinum-sensitive disease compared with platinum-resistant disease (27.1 vs 13.7 months, respectively). However, this difference was not statistically significant (P = 0.15). CONCLUSIONS: Platinum-based CT is an active regimen in recurrent UPSC even if patients received prior adjuvant platinum CT. Platinum-free interval predicts response and outcome of platinum-based CT in recurrent setting such as in ovarian cancer. Plantinum-taxane is more active than platinum-gemcitabine in recurrent UPSC.