Multidrug-resistant (MDR) tuberculosis (TB) constitutes a restricting factor for the effective treatment of TB worldwide. Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment of patients are the most effective strategy in the control of MDR-TB. Therefore, knowledge of drug resistance patterns of the MDR-TB clinical isolates are necessary in planning of an appropriate treatment regimen for the patient. The aims of this study were to detect the susceptibilities of MDR-TB isolates to second-line anti-TB drugs by E-test method, and to compare their results with Lowenstein-Jensen (LJ) proportion method. A total of 122 MDR (resistant to isoniazid and rifampicin) Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTC) strains isolated from samples of patients with pulmonary TB were included in the study. The isolates were identified by conventional methods and first-line anti-TB drug susceptibility testing was performed by the proportion method using LJ medium. The susceptibilities of the isolates to second-line anti-TB drugs [kanamycin (KN), ofloxacin (OFL), ethionamid (ETN), linezolid (LIN)] were tested by proportion method on LJ medium and E-test method on Middlebrook 7H11 medium. For this purpose, E-test strips (bioMerieux, Fransa) of KN (0.016-256 mg/ml), OFL (0.02-32 mg/ml), ETN (0.016-256 mg/ml), and LIN (0.016-256 mg/ml) were used. The susceptibility tests were evaluated in 5., 7., and 10. days after application of the E-test strips, and proportion method on LJ medium was evaluated 28 days later. Second line-anti-TB drug susceptibility results were obtained in 5 to 10 days by E-test. Of the MDR MTC strains 98% (119/122) were susceptible to KN, OFL and LIN, while 2% (3/122) of the strains were resistant to KN and ETN. The correlation between E-test and LJ proportion method was estimated as 96% for KN and ETN, 98% for OFL, and 100% for LIN. When compared with LJ proportion method, the specificity of E-test in the detection of susceptibility to KN, OFL, ETN and LIN were 60%, 38%, 60%, and 100%, respectively, while the sensitivity was 100% for all drugs. Our results indicated that E-test method exhibited high sensitivity and specificity (100%) for LIN, so it may be used alone in susceptibility testing for this drug, however since the specificity is low (38%) for OFL it should be used together with the proportion method. In conclusion, E-test method might contribute for initiation of an early and effective anti-TB drug treatment and control of infection by rapid diagnosis in MDR-TB cases.