The production of beta-lactamases is the most important mechanism of Gram-negative rod resistance to beta-lactams. Resistance to ceftazidime and cefepime in clinical isolates of Enterobacteriaceae (especially ESbetaL-positive E. coli and K. pneumoniae) and P. aeruginosa is life-threatening. However, all strains of the above mentioned species possess chromosomally encoded RND efflux pump systems in addition to beta-lactamase production. The main goal of this study was to assess the role of efflux pump systems in cefepime and/or ceftazidime resistant phenotypes of ESbetaL-positive clinical strains of Enterobacteriaceae and P. aeruginosa. The influence of the efflux pump inhibitor PAbetaN on the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values of tested cephalosporins was species-dependent. Generally, a significant reduction (at least four-fold) of beta-lactam MICs was observed in the presence of PAbetaN only in the case of P. aeruginosa clinical isolates as well as the ESbetaL-producing transformant PAO1161 DeltaampC. The usage of this agent resulted in the restoration of susceptibility to cefepime and/or ceftazidime in the majority of the P. aeruginosa ESbetaL-positive strains with low and moderate resistance to the above cephalosporins. Moreover, an outer membrane permeabilizing effect in the presence of PAbetaN was identified. Strain-dependent beta-lactamase leakage upon PAbetaN or beta-lactam treatment was demonstrated. The most important observation was the restoration of susceptibility of P. aeruginosa WUM226 to cefepime (MIC decrease from 32 to 4 mg/L) and ceftazidime (MIC decrease from 128 to 4 mg/L) in the presence of PAbetaN, which occurred despite an almost complete lack of beta-lactamase leakage from bacterial cells. In conclusion, these data indicate that RND efflux pumps can modify the susceptibility to beta-lactams in Gram-negative rods producing ESbetaLs. However, this phenomenon occurs only in P. aeruginosa strains and was not observed among E. coli and K. pneumoniae strains, representing the Enterobacteriaceae family.