UNLABELLED: Because of recent advances in deep sequencing technology, detailed analysis of hepatitis C virus (HCV) quasispecies and their dynamic changes in response to direct antiviral agents (DAAs) became possible, although the role of quasispecies is not fully understood. In this study, to clarify the evolution of viral quasispecies and the origin of drug-resistant mutations induced by interferon (IFN)-based protease inhibitor therapy, the nonstructural-3 (NS3) region of genotype 1b HCV in 34 chronic hepatitis patients treated with telaprevir (TVR)/pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN)/ribavirin (RBV) was subjected to a deep sequencing study coupled with phylogenetic analysis. Twenty-six patients (76.5%) achieved a sustained viral response (SVR), while 8 patients did not (non-SVR; 23.5%). When the complexity of the quasispecies was expressed as the mutation frequency or Shannon entropy value, a significant decrease in the IFNL3 (rs8099917) TT group and a marginal decrease in the SVR group were found soon (12 h) after the introduction of treatment, whereas there was no decrease in the non-SVR group and no significant decrease in mutation frequency in the IFNL3 TG/GG group. In the analysis of viral quasispecies composition in non-SVR patients, major populations greatly changed, accompanied by the appearance of resistance, and the compositions were unlikely to return to the pretreatment composition even after the end of therapy. Clinically TVR-resistant variants were observed in 5 non-SVR patients (5/8, 62.5%), all of which were suspected to have acquired resistance by mutations through phylogenetic analysis. In conclusion, results of the study have important implications for treatment response and outcome in interferon-based protease inhibitor therapy. IMPORTANCE: In the host, hepatitis C virus (HCV) consists of a variety of populations (quasispecies), and it is supposed that dynamic changes in quasispecies are closely related to pathogenesis, although this is poorly understood. In this study, recently developed deep sequencing technology was introduced, and changes in quasispecies associated with telaprevir (TVR)/pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN)/ribavirin (RBV) triple therapy and their clinical significance were investigated extensively by phylogenetic tree analysis. Through this study, the associations among treatment response, changes in viral quasispecies complexity in the early stage of treatment, changes in the quasispecies composition, and origin of TVR-resistant variant HCV were elucidated.