BACKGROUND: The number of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients undergoing lung transplantation continues to grow, as does the prevalence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) gram-negative rods. However, the posttransplant survival of patients with MDR pathogens, specifically pan-resistant Achromobacter xylosoxidans and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, is poorly characterized. METHODS: This was a retrospective review of CF patients (n = 186; all age, > 16 years) transplanted at the University of North Carolina from 1990 through 2013. Respiratory cultures before transplantation were reviewed for Achromobacter xylosoxidans and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and their antibiotic susceptibility patterns. Bacteria were defined as pan-resistant if they were resistant or intermediate to all antibiotics tested; otherwise, organisms were defined as MDR. Patients were divided into 5 groups: pan-resistant Achromobacter xylosoxidans (n = 9), MDR Achromobacter xylosoxidans (n = 15), pan-resistant Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (n = 5), MDR Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (n = 26), and CF patients without Achromobacter xylosoxidans, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia or Bulkholderia cenocepacia (n = 131). Survival was compared, and cause of death was described. RESULTS: The survival was similar between all cohorts (P = 0.29). Recurrence of the primary pathogen was the most common with pan-resistant Achromobacter xylosoxidans (100%) followed by MDR Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (46%), MDR Achromobacter xylosoxidans (33%), and finally, pan-resistant Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (20%). Death attributable to the primary pathogen was uncommon, occurring in 2 patients with MDR Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and 2 patients with MDR Achromobacter xylosoxidans. CONCLUSIONS: The CF patients with Achromobacter xylosoxidans and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia have similar posttransplant survival as compared to other CF patients, irrespective of their antibiotic susceptibility patterns. The presence of these organisms should not preclude lung transplantation.