BACKGROUND: Surgical site infection (SSI) is a common nosocomial infection in dogs and a growing concern in veterinary hospitals as an increase in multidrug-resistant pathogens is reported. Despite the need for rational and prudent antimicrobial use, few peer-reviewed and published veterinary studies have investigated the pathogenic growth including susceptibility patterns of the isolated pathogens in canine SSIs. The first objective of the present study was to estimate the distribution of bacterial pathogens in dogs with SSI and to investigate whether this was influenced by type of surgical procedure (clean, clean-contaminated, contaminated or dirty), duration of hospitalization, wound classification and depth of the infection, or antimicrobial treatment. The second objective was to assess susceptibility patterns to clinically relevant antimicrobials. During three years, four animal referral hospitals and three small animal clinics submitted bacterial swabs from canine SSIs for culture and susceptibility, together with a questionnaire completed by the attending clinician. RESULTS: Approximately two thirds of the in total 194 isolates were staphylococci. Staphylococcus pseudintermedius was the most prevalent finding (46%) followed by beta haemolytic Streptococcus spp. (24%). No associations between distribution of the isolated pathogens and classification of the surgical procedure, duration of hospitalization or depth of the SSI were shown, with the exception of Escherichia coli isolates being significantly more often found in deep wound infections than in superficial skin infections. Overall the possibilities of finding first generations antimicrobials to treat the SSIs included in the study were favorable, as the isolated pathogens were mostly without acquired antimicrobial resistance and multidrug resistance was uncommon. There were only three cases of methicillin-resistant S. pseudintermedius-infections (one percent of all isolates), one case of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase producing E. coli-infection, and no methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections. CONCLUSIONS: None of the investigated factors were shown to influence the distribution of bacterial pathogens. The majority of SSIs were caused by staphylococci, and S. pseudintermedius was the most prevalent pathogen. Based on the study results, use of first-line antimicrobials prior to receiving culture and susceptibility results is a rational empirical antimicrobial therapy for the studied dog population.