BACKGROUND: Microbiological characteristics of sepsis and antimicrobial resistance are well studied, although in State University of Campinas, no data has been published yet. METHODS: The main agents related to sepsis and antimicrobial resistance were analyzed. The blood culture records requested from 4,793 hospitalized patients were analyzed. The samples were processed using the Bact/Alert system for agent identification and antimicrobial susceptibility. RESULTS: A total of 1,017 patients met the inclusion criteria for a sepsis diagnosis, with 2,309 samples tested (2.27 samples/patient). There were 489 positive samples (21% positive) isolated from 337 patients (33.13%), but more rigorous criteria excluding potential contaminants resulted in analysis being restricted to 266 patients (315 agents). The prevalent microorganisms were coagulase negative Staphylococcus (CNS) (15.87%), Escherichia coli (13.0%), Staphylococcus aureus (11.7%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (9.8%), Enterobacter sp (9.5%), Acinetobacter baumannii (9.2%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (5.7%) and Candida sp (5.1%). Examining antimicrobial resistance in the agents revealed that 51% of the S. aureus isolates were methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) and 80% of the CNS isolates were oxacillin-resistant. For A. baumannii, the ideal profile drugs were ampicillin sulbactam and piperacillin/tazobactam, and for P. aeruginosa, they were piperacillin/tazobactam and ceftazidime. Enterobacteria showed on average 32.5% and 35.7% resistance to beta-lactams and ciprofloxacin, respectively. When all Gram-negative bacteria were considered, the resistance to beta-lactams rose to 40.5%, and the resistance to ciprofloxacin rose to 42.3%. CONCLUSIONS: Eighty percent of the agents identified in blood cultures from patients with sepsis belonged to a group of eight different agents. For empirical treatment, carbapenems and vancomycin unfortunately still remain the best therapeutic choice, except for A. baumannii and P. aeruginosa, for which piperacillin/tazobactan is the best option.