BACKGROUND: The emergence and spread of drug resistant Salmonellae of both human and animal origins are global concerns and worrisome in countries where the risk of infection is high and treatment options are limited. The objective of this study was to estimate the proportions of animal isolates resistant to antimicrobials used against human salmonellosis in Ethiopia. METHODS: Published studies on the antimicrobial resistance features of Salmonellae isolated from food animals of Ethiopia were searched in Medline, Google Scholar and the lists of references of articles. Eligible studies were selected by using inclusion and exclusion criteria and data were extracted. The extracted data included the host species, the numbers of isolates and the numbers of ampicillin, co-trimoxazole, chloramphenicol, ceftriaxone and ciprofloxacin resistant isolates. The risks of bias were assessed and the percentages of the variations of the estimates attributable to heterogeneities were quantified. Pooled proportions were estimated by the DerSimonian and Laird random effects model. RESULTS: Five hundred and fifty four Salmonellae isolated from cattle, camels, sheep, goats and pigs were tested with a variety of antimicrobials. The percentages of the variations attributable to heterogeneities were low for chloramphenicol and ceftriaxone (I(2) = 0) and high for ampicillin, co-trimoxazole and ciprofloxacin resistance estimates (I(2) > 75%). The pooled estimate of ampicillin resistant isolates was higher in slaughtered ruminants (17.28%) than in pigs (3.95%), (p < 0.001). The pooled estimates of co-trimoxazole resistant isolates in true ruminants (4.35%) and pigs (1.12%) were not significantly different (p > 0.05). The overall pooled estimates of chloramphenicol and ceftriaxone resistant isolates were 2.24% and 1.25%, respectively. Seven serotypes have been reported to be resistant to antimicrobials uncommonly used in veterinary clinical practice in Ethiopia. CONCLUSIONS: Among Salmonellae of farm animals, there exist strains that are resistant to drugs used in the therapeutic management of human salmonellosis in Ethiopia. Intervention measures should be taken to ensure the prudent use of antimicrobials and curb the spread of high risk strains across the country.