UNLABELLED: Enterovirus 71 (EV71) infection causes severe mortality involving multiple possible mechanisms, including cytokine storm, brain stem encephalitis, and fulminant pulmonary edema. Gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) may confer anti-EV71 activity; however, the claim that disease severity is highly correlated to an increase in IFN-gamma is controversial and would indicate an immune escape initiated by EV71. This study, investigating the role of IFN-gamma in EV71 infection using a murine model, showed that IFN-gamma was elevated. Moreover, IFN-gamma receptor-deficient mice showed higher mortality rates and more severe disease progression with slower viral clearance than wild-type mice. In vitro results showed that IFN-gamma pretreatment reduced EV71 yield, whereas EV71 infection caused IFN-gamma resistance with attenuated IFN-gamma signaling in IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) gene transactivation. To study the immunoediting ability of EV71 proteins in IFN-gamma signaling, 11 viral proteins were stably expressed in cells without cytotoxicity; however, viral proteins 2A and 3D blocked IFN-gamma-induced IRF1 transactivation following a loss of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) nuclear translocation. Viral 3D attenuated IFN-gamma signaling accompanied by a STAT1 decrease without interfering with IFN-gamma receptor expression. Restoration of STAT1 or blocking 3D activity was able to rescue IFN-gamma signaling. Interestingly, viral 2A attenuated IFN-gamma signaling using another mechanism by reducing the serine phosphorylation of STAT1 following the inactivation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase without affecting STAT1 expression. These results demonstrate the anti-EV71 ability of IFN-gamma and the immunoediting ability by EV71 2A and 3D, which attenuate IFN-gamma signaling through different mechanisms. IMPORTANCE: Immunosurveillance by gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) may confer anti-enterovirus 71 (anti-EV71) activity; however, the claim that disease severity is highly correlated to an increase in IFN-gamma is controversial and would indicate an immune escape initiated by EV71. IFN-gamma receptor-deficient mice showed higher mortality and more severe disease progression, indicating the anti-EV71 property of IFN-gamma. However, EV71 infection caused cellular insusceptibility in response to IFN-gamma stimulation. We used an in vitro system with viral protein expression to explore the novel IFN-gamma inhibitory properties of the EV71 2A and 3D proteins through the different mechanisms. According to this study, targeting either 2A or 3D pharmacologically and/or genetically may sustain a cellular susceptibility in response to IFN-gamma, particularly for IFN-gamma-mediated anti-EV71 activity.