INTRODUCTION: Rapid scale-up of antiretroviral therapy rollout in Sub-Saharan African countries faces the challenge of virological failure. This could be the consequence of transmitted drug-resistant human immunodeficiency virus strains at the population level. While a pre-antiretroviral therapy genotypic test has been a major component of the human immunodeficiency virus management programme in developed nations, it is yet to be incorporated into the antiretroviral therapy programme in resource-poor countries. CASE PRESENTATION: A 32-year-old Black African woman was seen for her six-month routine review. Her viral load after initiation of fixed drug combination of tenofovir, emtricitabine and efavirenz was 31,397 RNA copies/mL. Adherence was assessed to be good based on pharmacy pick-up dates, on-time clinic appointment records, medical file review, self-reporting and treatment supporter's report. Her viral load was repeated after another two months of close monitoring; the result showed viral load of 31,159 RNA copies/mL. She was assessed as virological failure to her first-line antiretrovirals and commenced on second-line antiretrovirals: zidovudine/lamivudine/Aluvia((R)) (lopinavir and ritonavir). A human immunodeficiency virus drug genotypic testing showed she was only susceptible to zidovudine and protease inhibitors. At third month on the new regimen, her viral load was suppressed. CONCLUSIONS: This case report demonstrates the possibility of a silent epidemic within the human immunodeficiency virus pandemic in resource-poor settings like Eastern Cape, South Africa. We described a case of early virological failure in a highly motivated young woman. Although, a pre-antiretroviral therapy genotypic test is yet to be incorporated into a human immunodeficiency virus programme in resource-poor countries, the need for it might become evident as the programme expands. Close monitoring of the viral load of patients according to national guidelines will enable early detection of a failing regimen and prompt intervention can be instituted to prevent morbidity and mortality. There is an urgent need to strengthen the human immunodeficiency virus programme in resource-poor countries to prevent the emergence of an epidemic of transmitted drug-resistant human immunodeficiency virus strains within the existing human immunodeficiency virus pandemic.