Maintaining production and economic viability in the face of resistance to multiple anthelmintic actives is a challenge for farmers in many countries. In this situation, most farmers in New Zealand rely on the use of combination products, containing multiple actives with similar spectra of activity, in order to maintain control. However, there are concerns that use of combinations, once resistance has already developed to the individual actives, could rapidly lead to complete failure of all actives. This study followed seven farms, previously diagnosed with resistance to at least two classes of anthelmintic, which were implementing a tailored programme of 'best practice parasite management'. The aim was to ascertain whether the programmes, which included the almost exclusive use of combination anthelmintics, were able to prevent resistance from developing further. Strategies implemented on each farm varied, but had consistent underlying principles i.e. to avoid over-use of anthelmintics; to minimise parasite challenge to susceptible stock; to maintain refugia of susceptibility and to ensure that only effective anthelmintics were used. Annual faecal egg count reduction tests (FECRT) were undertaken in lambs on all farms to monitor anthelmintic efficacy over 5 years. The efficacy of albendazole, ivermectin and levamisole was calculated and the changes in efficacy against Teladorsagia circumcincta assessed. Overall, there was a significant improvement in the effectiveness of both levamisole and ivermectin against T. circumcincta, and a positive but non-significant trend in efficacy of albendazole, i.e. there was evidence for reversion towards susceptibility. Hence, the almost exclusive use of combination anthelmintics, integrated with other resistance management strategies, did not result in further resistance development despite all farms exhibiting resistance to multiple actives at the outset. What-is-more, the measured increases in anthelmintic efficacy suggests that adoption of best practice management strategies may extend the useful life of anthelmintics even after resistance has been diagnosed.