OBJECTIVES: Ceftaroline fosamil is a novel cephalosporin with bactericidal activity against common pathogens associated with hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) and ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP). Ceftaroline is inactive against extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing or AmpC-overexpressing Enterobacteriaceae and has limited activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. CAPTURE is a multicenter, retrospective study designed to collect information on contemporary clinical use of ceftaroline fosamil in the USA. Data on off-label use of ceftaroline fosamil for the treatment of patients with HAP/VAP between September 2013 and March 2014 are presented. METHODS: Data were collected at participating study centers by randomized selection and review of patients' charts, and included patients' demographics, disease characteristics, pathogens isolated, antibiotic treatment and clinical outcomes. Patients receiving at least four consecutive doses of ceftaroline fosamil, with data available for determination of clinical cure, comprised the evaluable population. Clinical success was defined as either clinical cure with no further need for antibiotics treatment, or clinical improvement with a switch to another antibiotic. RESULTS: A total of 40 patients were evaluated: 27 with HAP and 13 with VAP. Demographics for patients with HAP and VAP were similar (59% male, mean age of 63 years and 54% male, mean age of 58 years, respectively). The clinical success rates were 75% overall, 82% in patients with HAP and 62% in patients with VAP. Clinical success rates for patients with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) isolated were 58% in patients with HAP and 57% in patients with VAP. Ceftaroline fosamil was used as a second-line therapy in majority of patients (85%) with clinical success rates of 79% similar to the published literature. CONCLUSION: The CAPTURE study data support further evaluation of ceftaroline fosamil as an effective treatment option for HAP and VAP when a ceftaroline susceptible etiologic pathogen is identified, including MRSA, or as a concurrent therapy when resistant Gram-negative pathogens are suspected.