UNLABELLED: Oncolytic viruses (OV) preferentially kill cancer cells due in part to defects in their antiviral responses upon exposure to type I interferons (IFNs). However, IFN responsiveness of some tumor cells confers resistance to OV treatment. The human type I IFNs include one IFN-beta and multiple IFN-alpha subtypes that share the same receptor but are capable of differentially inducing biological responses. The role of individual IFN subtypes in promoting tumor cell resistance to OV is addressed here. Two human IFNs which have been produced for clinical use, IFN-alpha2a and IFN-beta, were compared for activity in protecting human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) lines from oncolysis by vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). Susceptibility of HNSCC lines to killing by VSV varied. VSV infection induced increased production of IFN-beta in resistant HNSCC cells. When added exogenously, IFN-beta was significantly more effective at protecting HNSCC cells from VSV oncolysis than was IFN-alpha2a. In contrast, normal keratinocytes and endothelial cells were protected equivalently by both IFN subtypes. Differential responsiveness of tumor cells to IFN-alpha and -beta was further supported by the finding that autocrine IFN-beta but not IFN-alpha promoted survival of HNSCC cells during persistent VSV infection. Therefore, IFN-alpha and -beta differentially affect VSV oncolysis, justifying the evaluation and comparison of IFN subtypes for use in combination with VSV therapy. Pairing VSV with IFN-alpha2a may enhance selectivity of oncolytic VSV therapy for HNSCC by inhibiting VSV replication in normal cells without a corresponding inhibition in cancer cells. IMPORTANCE: There has been a great deal of progress in the development of oncolytic viruses. However, a major problem is that individual cancers vary in their sensitivity to oncolytic viruses. In many cases this is due to differences in their production and response to interferons (IFNs). The experiments described here compared the responses of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines to two IFN subtypes, IFN-alpha2a and IFN-beta, in protection from oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus. We found that IFN-alpha2a was significantly less protective for cancer cells than was IFN-beta, whereas normal cells were equivalently protected by both IFNs. These results suggest that from a therapeutic standpoint, selectivity for cancer versus normal cells may be enhanced by pairing VSV with IFN-alpha2a.