INTRODUCTION: Although linezolid is known to be effective when used as an adjunct therapy in the treatment of patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB), the clinical experience is limited. In this study the efficacy and adverse effects of linezolid treatment were evaluated. METHODS: A retrospective study of tolerability and efficacy of linezolid in MDR-TB patients was performed in Madrid, Spain. Demographic characteristics, microbiological and clinical features and data on treatment tolerability were collected. Regimens were constructed with a target of prescribing, at least, five anti-tuberculosis agents likely to be effective. Linezolid, at a dosage of 1200 or 600 mg daily, was included to complete the treatment if no other sensitive drugs were available. Vitamin B6 was used to reduce toxicity. Treatment outcome and clinical status at last contact were compared between patients with linezolid-containing regimens and with those without linezolid-containing regimens. RESULTS: During the period 1998-2014, 55 patients with MDR-TB received treatment. In 21 of these patients, linezolid was added. The median of linezolid administration was 23.9 months (IQT 13.1-24.7). Patients using linezolid showed a greater resistance to drugs, with a median of 6 (IQR 5-7) compared with those who did not use it, with a median of 4 drugs (IQR 3-5) (p<0.001). The median time to sputum culture conversion of the patients in the linezolid group (73.5 days) did not differ significantly from those in the non-linezolid group (61 days) (p=0.29). There were no significant differences in the outcomes of the two patient groups. There were no reported adverse events in 81% of patients assigned to linezolid therapy. Only four patients developed toxicity attributed to linezolid. The most serious adverse event in these patients was anemia observed in the two patients treated with 1200 mg per day. One of them also developed moderate paresthesia. In both cases the dosage was reduced to 600 mg per day, with improvement of the anemia and paresthesias. No patients stopped linezolid therapy. CONCLUSION: A daily dosage of 600 mg of linezolid was well tolerated without stopping treatment in any case. The efficacy of the treatment and the outcomes were similar in both the linezolid and non-linezolid group.