Interferon-gamma (Ifngamma), a key macrophage activating cytokine, plays pleiotropic roles in host immunity. In this study, the ability of Ifngamma to induce the aggregation of resident mouse adherent peritoneal exudate cells (APECs), consisting primarily of macrophages, was investigated. Cell-cell interactions involve adhesion molecules and, upon addition of Ifngamma, CD11b re-localizes preferentially to the sites of interaction on APECs. A functional role of CD11b in enhancing aggregation is demonstrated using Reopro, a blocking reagent, and siRNA to Cd11b. Studies with NG-methyl-L-arginine (LNMA), an inhibitor of Nitric oxide synthase (Nos), NO donors, e.g., S-nitroso-N-acetyl-DL-penicillamine (SNAP) or Diethylenetriamine/nitric oxide adduct (DETA/NO), and Nos2-/- mice identified Nitric oxide (NO) induced by Ifngamma as a key regulator of aggregation of APECs. Further studies with Nos2-/- APECs revealed that some Ifngamma responses are independent of NO: induction of MHC class II and CD80. On the other hand, Nos2 derived NO is important for other functions: motility, phagocytosis, morphology and aggregation. Studies with cytoskeleton depolymerizing agents revealed that Ifngamma and NO mediate the cortical stabilization of Actin and Tubulin which contribute to aggregation of APECs. The biological relevance of aggregation of APECs was delineated using infection experiments with Salmonella Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium). APECs from orally infected, but not uninfected, mice produce high amounts of NO and aggregate upon ex vivo culture in a Nos2-dependent manner. Importantly, aggregated APECs induced by Ifngamma contain fewer intracellular S. Typhimurium compared to their single counterparts post infection. Further experiments with LNMA or Reopro revealed that both NO and CD11b are important for aggregation; in addition, NO is bactericidal. Overall, this study elucidates novel roles for Ifngamma and Nos2 in regulating Actin, Tubulin, CD11b, motility and morphology during the aggregation response of APECs. The implications of aggregation or "group behavior" of APECs are discussed in the context of host resistance to infectious organisms.