BACKGROUND: The burden of acute respiratory infections (ARI) among Moroccan children remains significant. However, scarce information is available regarding trends in its epidemiology and etiology, or regarding its associated prognostic factors. The purpose of this work was to review available data on the burden of ARI among children under five years of age in Morocco. METHODS: A systematic review was conducted for the period 1997-2014 using the PRISMA proposed methodology. Various online databases were screened, in addition to physical libraries of Moroccan medical schools, and official reports of the Moroccan Ministry of Health. Search queries in English and French languages included: Respiratory Tract Infections, pneumonia, epidemiology, etiology, microbiology, mortality and Morocco. The documents were included for analysis when they reported original data on the incidence, distribution, or a clinical description of the diseases or their etiology or described clinical management or national preventive strategies. RESULTS: Thirty-two documents were included in the final analysis. 21 of which had been published. In 2012, ARI caused 13% of paediatric deaths, half of the consultations at health facilities and third of the paediatric admissions. The microorganisms more frequently identified among hospitalized children were Streptococcus pneumoniae (38%) and Haemophilus influenza type b (Hib) (15%). The MOH introduced Hib vaccines into the national immunization program (PNI) in 2007and the 13-valent vaccine against pneumococcus in 2010. The national first line antibiotics recommended for non-severe ambulatory treatment is Amoxicillin. Studies of antibiotic resistance showed from 1998 to 2008 a 22% increase in the rate of penicillin non-susceptibility among Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates. Viral respiratory infections and the role attributed to air pollution in the incidence of ARI have been poorly characterized. CONCLUSIONS: Further efforts should be made towards the development of adequate surveillance programs to better clarify the epidemiology, etiology, antimicrobial susceptibility patterns and the effectiveness of the preventives and curatives strategies in place against paediatric ARIs in Morocco. Additionally, a holistical approach should be used to identify the heath determinants of ARIs among children.