BACKGROUND: Gastroenteritis attributable to Salmonella enterica and the continuous increase in antimicrobial resistance of this gut pathogen, which compromises the use of previously effective treatments, is of great concern for public health. This study was conducted in order to investigate the presence of plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR) determinants and beta-lactamase-encoding genes, in S. enterica, isolated from humans, one companion animal and food. Moreover, the study aimed to identify potential vehicles of transmission of resistant strains to humans, with focus on food products (meat). METHODS: A total of 20 S. enterica isolates recovered from food (chicken and pork meat), one companion animal and humans (stool samples), were examined for their serotype, antimicrobial susceptibility and the presence of PMQR and beta-lactamase-encoding genes. Moreover, the genetic relatedness of nine Salmonella Infantis and ten Salmonella Enteritidis isolates was analyzed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). RESULTS: Among all isolates, 15 (75%) were multidrug-resistant (MDR) and the majority of them proved to be resistant to nalidixic acid and fluoroquinolones (FQs) (ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin). Twelve isolates (60%) harboured at least one PMQR gene [qnrA, qnrB, qnrS, aac (6')-Ib-cr or qepA] while seven isolates (35%) carried at least one beta-lactamase-encoding gene (bla TEM, bla PSE-1, bla SHV or bla CTX-M). Moreover, two or more PMQR or beta-lactamase-encoding genes co-existed in a single S. enterica isolate. A number of nine Salmonella Infantis, as well as the majority of Salmonella Enteritidis isolates analyzed by PFGE proved to be closely related. CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrated the co-existence of PMQR and beta-lactamase-encoding genes among the Salmonella isolates recovered and confirmed that multiple mechanisms might be involved in the acquisition and spread of resistance determinants. The close genetic relatedness between the clinical and foodborne S. enterica isolates, suggested that chicken meat might be a possible cause of human salmonellosis in our country, during the study period. Results of this study might improve understanding of the antimicrobial resistance mechanisms and transmission dynamics of Salmonella spp. Here, we report for the first time the presence of PMQR and beta-lactamase-encoding genes in S. enterica isolates, recovered from humans, one companion animal and food, in Romania.