OBJECTIVE: The use of antimicrobial agents has been increased, leading to bacterial resistance. Therefore the health professionals should have a sound knowledge about the prescription of antibiotics to overcome the increasing bacterial resistance. The main objective of this study was to evaluate the attitudes of dentists towards the prescription of antibiotics during endodontic treatment in north of Saudi Arabia. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a survey based descriptive cross-sectional study. This study has been done among the dentists of northern region of Saudi Arabia. A questionnaire was designed, regarding pattern of prescription of antibiotics by the dentists in the north of Saudi Arabia and the use of antibiotics in the treatment of different endodontic conditions during endodontic treatment. This questionnaire was distributed among 200 dentists in the north of Saudi Arabia. This study will encourage the dentists of the northern region of Saudi Arabia to be up to date about the current and prospective guidelines for the prescription of antibiotics and follow these guidelines for the antibiotic prescription. RESULTS: The collected information was analysed by using a computer software SPSS version 18. Majority of the dentists were male accounting for 86%. The age range for 68% of the respondents was 25-35 years. Most of the dentists were having just a basic dental qualification i.e. 65.60%. Out of the total responding dentists, 50% were working in the ministry of health. 77% of the respondents prescribed the antibiotics for necrotic pulp with acute apical periodontitis; swelling present; mod/ severe preoperative symptoms. Out of the total responding dentists, 45.2% prescribed amoxicillin and clavulanic acid combination as the drug of choice. CONCLUSION: It is concluded from the present study that the dentists should know the scientific basis for the prescription of antibiotics during endodontic therapy. They should follow and should not neglect the current guidelines for antibiotic prescriptions. There should be community awareness programmes for the dentists regarding the misuse of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance so that they can play a role in controlling these global problems.