BACKGROUND: Using the US Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) human tetracycline breakpoints to predict minocycline and doxycycline susceptibility of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (SP) isolates from dogs is not appropriate because they are too high to meet pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic data using a standard dose. New breakpoints have been approved for doxycycline and proposed for minocycline. Revised breakpoints are four dilutions lower than tetracycline breakpoints, providing a more conservative standard for classification of isolates. HYPOTHESIS/OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this study were to measure minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of minocycline and doxycycline of 100 canine meticillin-resistant SP clinical isolates, compare their susceptibilities to minocycline and doxycycline based on current and revised standards, and document their tetracycline resistance genes. METHODS: E-test strips were used to determine MICs. PCR was used to identify tet genes. RESULTS: Using the human tetracycline breakpoint of MIC </= 4 mug/mL, 76 isolates were susceptible to minocycline and 36 isolates were susceptible to doxycycline. In contrast, using the proposed minocycline breakpoint (MIC </= 0.25 mug/mL) and approved doxycycline breakpoint (MIC </= 0.125 mug/mL), 31 isolates were susceptible to both minocycline and doxycycline. Thirty-one isolates carried no tet genes, two had tet(K) and 67 had tet(M). CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Use of the human tetracycline breakpoints misclassified 45 and five of the isolates as susceptible to minocycline and doxycycline, respectively. PCR analysis revealed that 43 and five of the isolates classified as susceptible to minocycline and doxycycline, respectively, possessed the tetracycline resistance gene, tet(M), known to confer resistance to both drugs. These results underscore the importance of utilizing the proposed minocycline and approved doxycycline canine breakpoints in place of human tetracycline breakpoints.