BACKGROUND: Minocycline, a second-generation tetracycline alleviates neuro-inflammation and protects the blood-brain barrier (BBB) in ischemia stroke. However, the effect of minocycline in hypoxia-induced BBB damage is unclear. Here, we have investigated the effect of minocycline under hypoxia and explored its possible underlying mechanisms. METHODS: The effect of minocycline was examined in vitro in Human Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cells (HBMECs) using Trans Epithelial Electric Resistance (TEER). Protein and mRNA expression of Hypoxia-Inducible Factors-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2 and MMP-9) and tight junction proteins (TJs) were detected by using Western blot and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The translocation and transcription of HIF-1alpha were detected by using immunocytochemistry and luciferase reporter assay. In vivo, to adult male Sprague Dawley (SD) rats under hypobaric hypoxia were administered minocycline for 1h and BBB permeability was tested by using Evans Blue and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). Also, reduction of NAD-dependent deacetylase sirtuin-3 (SIRT-3)/proline hydroxylase-2 (PHD-2) signaling pathway was evaluated. RESULTS: Minocycline increased TEER in HBMECs after hypoxia (P<0.05), and reduced the extravasation of Evans Blue (P<0.05) and colloidal gold nanoparticles in rats. Minocycline administration significantly reduced HIF-1alpha expression, protein and mRNA expression of MMP-2, MMP-9 and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) (P<0.05), and increased TJs (ZO-1, claudin-5 and occluding) (P<0.05) in HBMECs after hypoxia. Furthermore, minocycline reversed the hypoxia-induced reduction of PHD-2 (P<0.05) and SIRT-3 (P<0.05). Effects of minocycline were abolished by siRNA-mediated knockdown of SIRT-3 in the brain. CONCLUSIONS: Minocycline inhibits HIF-1alpha-mediated cellular responses and protects BBB integrity through SIRT-3/PHD-2 pathway, proving to be a potential drug for the prevention and treatment of hypoxic brain injuries.