UNLABELLED: The aim of this study was to determine the incidence of Enterococcus species and six virulence factors of Enterococcus faecium which were isolated from surface water and wells. Fifteen different water samples, which were used for drinking as well as agricultural irrigation, were collected from nine private wells and surface water from six rivers located at the east of Tehran. The Ent. faecium isolates were tested for their resistance to 10 antibiotics and their virulence factors were detected using multiplex PCR for esp, acm, gelE, asa1, cylA and hyl genes. The most predominant species in 315 isolates were Ent. faecium (n = 118) followed by Enterococcus galinarom (n = 110), Enterococcus mundeti (n = 18), Enterococcus hirea (n = 37) and Enterococcus casselifelavus (n = 32). The resistance rates were observed in 41.5, 27.1, 12.7, 6.8 and 1.7% isolates for tetracycline, erythromycin, ampicillin, ciprofloxacin and chloramphenicol respectively. None of the Ent. faecium isolates were resistant to vancomycin, teicoplanin, linezolid, gentamicin and quinuspristin-dalfopristin. Virulence determinant was found in 84.7, 33.9, 16.1 and 2.5% of isolates for acm, asa1, esp, cylA respectively. None of the isolates carried hyl and gelE gene. The presence of virulence factors and antibiotic resistance indicated that water might be an important source of dissemination of virulent enterococci. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Contamination of drinking or recreational water by human or animal faecal waste is a major public health threat. In this study, we determine the incidence of Enterococcus species and six virulence factors of Enterococcus faecium which were isolated from surface water and wells. Results from this study suggest that the presence of Ent. faecium in natural and well waters was found to be significant in rural areas of Tehran. Resistant to erythromycin among Ent. faecium was relatively high and the incidence of acm and asa1 among our isolates was common overall.