UNLABELLED: Expression of the cytoprotective enzyme heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is significantly reduced in the brain prefrontal cortex of HIV-positive individuals with HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). Furthermore, this HO-1 deficiency correlates with brain viral load, markers of macrophage activation, and type I interferon responses. In vitro, HIV replication in monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) selectively reduces HO-1 protein and RNA expression and induces production of neurotoxic levels of glutamate; correction of this HO-1 deficiency reduces neurotoxic glutamate production without an effect on HIV replication. We now demonstrate that macrophage HO-1 deficiency, and the associated neurotoxin production, is a conserved feature of infection with macrophage-tropic HIV-1 strains that correlates closely with the extent of replication, and this feature extends to HIV-2 infection. We further demonstrate that this HO-1 deficiency does not depend specifically upon the HIV-1 accessory genes nef, vpr, or vpu but rather on HIV replication, even when markedly limited. Finally, antiretroviral therapy (ART) applied to MDM after HIV infection is established does not prevent HO-1 loss or the associated neurotoxin production. This work defines a predictable relationship between HIV replication, HO-1 loss, and neurotoxin production in MDM that likely reflects processes in place in the HIV-infected brains of individuals receiving ART. It further suggests that correcting this HO-1 deficiency in HIV-infected MDM could provide neuroprotection above that provided by current ART or proposed antiviral therapies directed at limiting Nef, Vpr, or Vpu functions. The ability of HIV-2 to reduce HO-1 expression suggests that this is a conserved phenotype among macrophage-tropic human immunodeficiency viruses that could contribute to neuropathogenesis. IMPORTANCE: The continued prevalence of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) underscores the need for adjunctive therapy that targets the neuropathological processes that persist in antiretroviral therapy (ART)-treated HIV-infected individuals. To this end, we previously identified one such possible process, a deficiency of the antioxidative and anti-inflammatory enzyme heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in the brains of individuals with HAND. In the present study, our findings suggest that the HO-1 deficiency associated with excess glutamate production and neurotoxicity in HIV-infected macrophages is a highly conserved phenotype of macrophage-tropic HIV strains and that this phenotype can persist in the macrophage compartment in the presence of ART. This suggests a plausible mechanism by which HIV infection of brain macrophages in ART-treated individuals could exacerbate oxidative stress and glutamate-induced neuronal injury, each of which is associated with neurocognitive dysfunction in infected individuals. Thus, therapies that rescue the HO-1 deficiency in HIV-infected individuals could provide additional neuroprotection to ART.