INTRODUCTION: The hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes chronic hepatitis B (CHB) in approximately 350 million people worldwide who have an increased risk of end-stage liver disease and/or hepatocellular carcinoma. SOURCES OF DATA: Several peer-reviewed papers featuring new approaches to anti-HBV management. Additionally, we also reviewed recent abstract presentations at international congresses. AREAS OF AGREEMENT: There has been great progress in CHB therapy with the development of standard and pegylated interferon (i.e. PEG-IFN) as well as nucleos/tide analogs (NAs). IFN has both antiviral and immunomodulatory effects and through immune-mediated destruction of infected hepatocytes offers the possibility of finite therapy. However, this 'killing for a cure' antiviral strategy may not be tolerated in many, especially in cirrhotic patients. NAs inhibit viral reverse transcriptase, have few side effects and prevent liver disease progression, but cannot offer a cure as they have little effect on the resilient HBV covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) intermediate. Moreover, NAs such as tenofovir and entecavir offer a high genetic barrier to resistance, but are expensive and not readily available in many global regions. GROWING POINTS: Despite significant treatment advances, there is increased recognition of the need for improved anti-HBV treatments, and new virologic tests for monitoring treatment response. AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: The role of quantitative hepatitis B surface antigen, intrahepatic cccDNA levels and viral genotype in selecting treatment candidates and refining NA stopping rules. AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING NEW RESEARCH: Potential new therapies include viral entry inhibitors, RNA interference technologies (i.e. RNAi) and small molecules that modulate cccDNA transcription, as well as novel immunomodulatory therapies to boost HBV-specific T cell responses. The ultimate goal of new tests and anti-HBV therapies is to reduce the burden and expense of life-long CHB treatment, as 'only diamonds are forever'.