UNLABELLED: The peptide drug enfuvirtide (T20) is the only HIV-1 fusion inhibitor in clinical use, but it easily induces drug resistance, calling for new strategies for developing effective drugs. On the basis of the M-T hook structure, we recently developed highly potent short-peptide HIV-1 fusion inhibitors (MTSC22 and HP23), which mainly target the conserved gp41 pocket and possess high genetic barriers to resistance. Here, we focused on the selection and characterization of HIV-1 escape mutants of MTSC22, which revealed new resistance pathways and mechanisms. Two mutations (E49K and L57R) located at the inhibitor-binding site and two mutations (N126K and E136G) located at the C-terminal heptad repeat region of gp41 were identified as conferring high resistance either singly or in combination. While E49K reduced the C-terminal binding of inhibitors via an electrostatic repulsion, L57R dramatically disrupted the N-terminal binding of M-T hook structure and pocket-binding domain. Unlike E49K and N126K, which enhanced the stability of the endogenous viral six-helical bundle core (6-HB), L57R and E136G conversely destabilized the 6-HB structure. We also demonstrated that both primary and secondary mutations caused the structural changes in 6-HB and severely impaired the capability for HIV-1 entry. Collectively, our data provide novel insights into the mechanisms of short-peptide fusion inhibitors targeting the gp41 pocket site and help increase our understanding of the structure and function of gp41 and HIV-1 evolution. IMPORTANCE: The deep pocket on the N-trimer of HIV-1 gp41 has been considered an ideal drug target because of its high degree of conservation and essential role in viral entry. Short-peptide fusion inhibitors, which contain an M-T hook structure and mainly target the pocket site, show extremely high binding and inhibitory activities as well as high genetic barriers to resistance. In this study, the HIV-1 mutants resistant to MTSC22 were selected and characterized, which revealed that the E49K and L57R substitutions at the inhibitor-binding site and the N126K and E136G substitutions at the C-terminal heptad repeat region of gp41 critically determine the resistance phenotype. The data provide novel insights into the mechanisms of action of the M-T hook structure-based fusion inhibitors which will help further our understanding of the structure-function relationship of gp41 and molecular pathways of HIV-1 evolution and eventually facilitate the development of new anti-HIV drugs.