The variety of antiparasitics that can be used against caligid copepods is limited and efforts are needed to maintain their efficacies. The objective of this study was to monitor the sensitivity of Caligus rogercresseyi, populations towards antiparasitics based on deltamethrin, cypermethrin and azamethiphos within and across geographic regions. The bioassay design consisted of exposing parasites collected from 23 farms to the different chemotherapeutants at the concentration and exposure times recommended for field treatment, under laboratory conditions, and evaluating the number of dead and live parasites 48h after exposure. Parasites were collected from 23 farms distributed in four macrozones in the Los Lagos region and three macrozones in the Aysen region. Parasite sensitivity was evaluated using a Generalized Linear Mixed Model of the Binomial family (Logit) fit by the maximum likelihood, using the lme4 package in R. Parasite gender, macrozone, and antiparasitics were used as fixed factors and farm was the random factor. The model including all the factors proved to be a useful tool for predicting parasite sensitivity. This approach identified (i) those macrozones with a greater likelihood of finding parasite populations which are more or less sensitive to the three antiparasitics, (ii) cases in which parasite sensitivity to the different antiparasitics varied within a given macrozone, (iii) differences in sensitivity between females and males and (iv) an important random effect associated with farm. The results indicate a spatial variability of parasite sensitivity to antiparasitics which, added to the continuous treatments applied on farms, suggest it is necessary to regularly update the sensitivity status in the macrozones. This would allow managers to improve their decision making processes regarding the type of antiparasitic to be used in a given situation. The one-concentration type bioassay performed in this study allowed us to perform a large spatial study with replicated tests of the sensitivity of C. rogercresseyi to pyrethroids and azamethiphos. Further studies should focus on the farm effects, the relationship between the sensitivity of parasites and field efficacy, as well as parasite population structure and connectivity with regard to parasite transmission between farms.