BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is a commonly diagnosed disease that has a significant impact on a child's quality of life. However, no useful biomarker is available to identify antibiotic-responsive CRS. We determined the significance of eosinophil-related markers and total IgE levels in childhood CRS with regard to antibiotic response. DESIGN AND SETTING: This was a case-control study of patients admitted to Uijeongbu St. Mary's Hospital between November 2010 and November 2011 and diagnosed with CRS. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this analytical cross-sectional study, we identified children whose symptoms and radiologic abnormalities did not resolve after 12 weeks despite appropriate antibiotics (non-responder CRS group), children whose symptoms and radiologic abnormalities resolved after 12 weeks with appropriate antibiotics (responder CRS group), and healthy controls selected from clinic patients. Skin prick tests were performed along with serum total IgE, total eosinophil count (TEC), serum eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) level, and ImmunoCAP analysis for common allergens. RESULTS: This study included 36 responders, 22 nonresponders and 22 healthy controls. The prevalence of allergic diseases, atopy, and a family history of allergic diseases were significantly higher in the non-responder group than in the responder and control groups. TEC, ECP, and total IgE levels were significantly higher in the non-responder group than in the responder and control groups (all P < .05). Multiple linear regression analysis showed that no response to appropriate antibiotics and TEC was positively associated with ECP concentration. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that there is a high prevalence of allergic diseases in the non-responder group, that the TEC and ECP levels in the non-responder group are significantly higher than those in the responder group and controls, and that no response to antibiotics may be due to eosinophilic inflammation. The measurement of serum ECP may be useful in monitoring the progress of childhood CRS with regard to antibiotic response.