STUDY AIM: Evaluation of detection and drug resistance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in patients from the Lodzkie Voivodship in the period 2009 - 2013. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The data presented in the study include information obtained while diagnosing patients from the Lodzkie Voivodship in order to detect infections with Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the period 2009-2013. RESULTS: In 2009-2013 we analyzed clinical specimens for the purpose of detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Tubercle bacilli were confirmed in 5621 specimens in 2196 patients; positive bacterioscopy results were observed in 1724 clinical specimens. In the study period 18 clinical specimens obtained from children contained tubercle bacilli. In the period 2009-2013 we noted multi-drug resistant (MDR) strain in 41 clinical specimens, which made up 1.8% of strains with known results of drug-sensitivity. In 5 clinical specimens we observed extensively-drug resistant (XDR) strain, which made up 0.2% of strains with known results of drug-sensitiveness. 12 clinical specimens appeared to contain pre-XDR strain, which constituted 0.6% of strains with known results of drug-sensitivity. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS: Despite advances in the diagnostics and treatment of tuberculosis (TB) this diseases still poses a serious medical problem. The detection level in the period 2009-2013 is relatively unchanged, with regards to both bacterioscopy and culture methods. Thus, the laboratory detection of tuberculosis bacilli is similar. It directly results from the enforcement of strict procedures regarding the quality of specimens collected for microbiological purposes and the control of the performed tests, which contributes to a greater number of confirmed cases of TB. In the study period the number of new cases of the infectious diseases is variable. Only in children this number remains stable over the years. Researchers observe that tubercle bacilli are resistant to basic first-line treatment drugs. They also note the occurrence of MDR, pre-XDR and XDR strains. Hence, it is important to regularly and carefully monitor the sensitivity of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to antibiotics administered in a long-term anti-tuberculosis therapy.