OBJECTIVE: To investigate the distribution and drug sensitivity of pathogens and risk factors for ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) in children with congenial heart disease (CAD) after surgery. METHODS: According to the occurrence of VAP, 312 children with CAD who received mechanical ventilation after surgery for 48 hours or longer between January 2012 and December 2014 were classified into VAP (n=53) and non-VAP groups (n=259). Sputum samples were collected and cultured for pathogens in children with VAP. The drug sensitivity of pathogens was analyzed. The risk factors for postoperative VAP were identified by multiple logistic regression analysis. RESULTS: The sputum cultures were positive in 51 out of 53 children with VAP, and a total of 63 positive strains were cultured, including 49 strains of Gram-negative bacteria (78%), 9 strains of Gram-positive bacteria (14%) and 5 strains of funqi (8%). The drug sensitivity test showed that Gram-negative bacteria were resistant to amoxicillin, piperacillin, cefotaxime and ceftazidime, with a resistance rate of above 74%, and demonstrated a sensitivity to amikacin, polymyxin and meropenem (resistance rate of 19%-32%). Single factor analysis showed albumin levels, preoperative use of antibiotics, duration of mechanical ventilation, times of tracheal intubation, duration of anesthesia agent use, duration of acrdiopulmonary bypass, duration of aortic occlusion and use of histamin2-receptor blockade were significantly different between the VAP and non-VAP groups (P<0.05). The multiple logistic regression showed albumin levels (<35 g/L), duration of mechanical ventilation (>/= 7 d), times of tracheal intubation (>/= 3), duration of acrdiopulmonary bypass (>/= 100 minutes) and duation of aortic occlusion (>/= 60 minutes) were independent risk factors for VAP in children with CAD after surgery. CONCLUSIONS: Gram-nagative bacteria are main pathogens for VAP in children with CAD after surgery. The antibiotics should be used based on the distribution of pathogens and drug sensitivity test results of pathogens. The effective measures for prevention of VAP should be taken according to the related risk factors for VAP to reduce the morbidity of VAP in children with CAD after surgery.