BACKGROUND: Hematologic toxicity represents a major side effect of cytotoxic chemotherapy frequently preventing adequately dosed chemotherapy application and impeding therapeutic success. Transgenic (over)expression of chemotherapy resistance (CTX-R) genes in hematopoietic stem- and progenitor cells represents a potential strategy to overcome this problem. To apply this concept in the context of acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplasia, we have investigated the overexpression of the multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) and the cytidine deaminase (CDD) gene conferring resistance to anthracyclines and cytarabine (Ara-C), the two most important drugs in the treatment of these diseases. METHODS: State-of-the-art, third generation, self-inactivating (SIN) lentiviral vectors were utilized to overexpress a human CDD-cDNA and a codon-optimized human MDR1-cDNA corrected for cryptic splice sites from a spleen focus forming virus derived internal promoter. Studies were performed in myeloid 32D cells as well as primary lineage marker negative (lin(-)) murine bone marrow cells and flow cytometric analysis of suspension cultures and clonogenic analysis of vector transduced cells following cytotoxic drug challenge were utilized as read outs. RESULTS: Efficient chemoprotection of CDD and MDR1 transduced hematopoietic 32D as well as primary lin(-) cells was proven in the context of Ara-C and anthracycline application. Both, CTX-R transduced 32D as well as primary hematopoietic cells displayed marked resistance at concentrations 5-20 times the LD50 of non-transduced control cells. Moreover, simultaneous CDD/MDR1 gene transfer resulted in similar protection levels even when combined Ara-C anthracycline treatment was applied. Furthermore, significant enrichment of transduced cells was observed upon cytotoxic drug administration. CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate efficient chemoprotection as well as enrichment of transduced cells in hematopoietic cell lines as well as primary murine hematopoietic progenitor cells following Ara-C and/or anthracycline application, arguing for the efficacy as well as feasibility of our approach and warranting further evaluation of this concept.