PURPOSE: The relationship between smoking and pancreatic cancer biology, particularly in the context of the heterogeneous microenvironment, remains incompletely defined. We hypothesized that nicotine exposure would lead to the augmentation of paracrine growth factor signaling between tumor-associated stroma (TAS) and pancreatic cancer cells, ultimately resulting in accelerated tumor growth and metastasis. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of tobacco use on overall survival was analyzed using a prospectively maintained database of surgically resected patients with pancreatic cancer. Nicotine exposure was evaluated in vitro using primary patient-derived TAS and pancreatic cancer cells independently and in coculture. Nicotine administration was then assessed in vivo using a patient-derived pancreatic cancer xenograft model. RESULTS: Continued smoking was associated with reduced overall survival after surgical resection. In culture, nicotine-stimulated hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) secretion in primary patient-derived TAS and nicotine stimulation was required for persistent pancreatic cancer cell c-Met activation in a coculture model. c-Met activation in this manner led to the induction of inhibitor of differentiation-1 (Id1) in pancreatic cancer cells, previously established as a mediator of growth, invasion and chemoresistance. HGF-induced Id1 expression was abrogated by both epigenetic and pharmacologic c-Met inhibition. In patient-derived pancreatic cancer xenografts, nicotine treatment augmented tumor growth and metastasis; tumor lysates from nicotine-treated mice demonstrated elevated HGF expression by qRT-PCR and phospho-Met levels by ELISA. Similarly, elevated levels of phospho-Met in surgically resected pancreatic cancer specimens correlated with reduced overall survival. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data demonstrate a novel, microenvironment-dependent paracrine signaling mechanism by which nicotine exposure promotes the growth and metastasis of pancreatic cancer.