BACKGROUND: The milk-fat-globule membrane (MFGM) contains phospholipids and membrane glycoproteins that have been shown to affect pathogen colonization and gut barrier integrity. OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we determined whether commercial heat-treated MFGM can increase resistance to diarrheagenic Escherichia coli. METHODS: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, 4-wk parallel-intervention study was conducted in healthy adults. Participants were randomly assigned to a milk protein concentrate rich in MFGM [10 g Lacprodan PL-20 (Arla Foods Ingredients Group P/S), twice daily; n = 30; MFGM group) or a control [10 g Miprodan 30 (sodium caseinate), twice daily; n = 28]. After 2 wk, participants were orally challenged with live, attenuated diarrheagenic E. coli (10(10) colony-forming units). Primary outcomes were infection-induced diarrhea and fecal diarrheagenic E. coli excretion. Secondary outcomes were gastrointestinal symptoms [Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS)], stool frequency, and stool consistency (Bristol Stool Scale). RESULTS: Diarrheagenic E. coli resulted in increased fecal output, lower relative fecal dry weight, increased fecal E. coli numbers, and an increase in stool frequency and gastrointestinal complaints at day 1 after challenge. MFGM significantly decreased the E. coli-induced changes in reported stool frequency (1.1 +/- 0.1 stools/d in the MFGM group; 1.6 +/- 0.2 stools/d in the control group; P = 0.04) and gastrointestinal complaints at day 2 (1.1 +/- 0.5 and 2.5 +/- 0.6 GSRS scores in the MFGM and control groups, respectively; P = 0.05). MFGM did not affect fecal wet weight and E. coli excretion at day 2 after challenge. CONCLUSIONS: The attenuated diarrheagenic E. coli strain transiently induced mild symptoms of a food-borne infection, with complete recovery of reported clinical symptoms within 2 d. The present diarrheagenic E. coli challenge trial conducted in healthy adults indicates that a milk concentrate rich in natural, bioactive phospho- and sphingolipids from the MFGM may improve in vivo resistance to diarrheagenic E. coli. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT01800396.