BACKGROUND: Choice of empiric antibiotic(s) for early ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP) involves weighing the risks of potential infection with multi-drug resistant (MDR) pathogens against those of over-exposure to broad-spectrum agents. Although early VAP is believed to be rarely caused by MDR pathogens, the overall incidence of all methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections is increasing. We questioned if MRSA VAP is becoming more common and if these infections were occurring earlier in the patient's hospital course. We hypothesized that 1) early (2-4 d from intubation) VAP caused by MRSA is relatively uncommon and 2) those patients with early VAP because of MRSA had risk factors associated with a MDR organism infection. METHODS: Bronchoscopies with lavage (BALs) from patients admitted to our SICU from 2010-2013 were reviewed. MRSA VAP was defined as growth of >/=10(5) cfu/mL from BAL. Multi-drug resistant risk factors included a previous MRSA infection or positive nasal swab, antibiotic use within 90 d, hospitalization for >5 d, hemodialysis, homelessness, intravenous drug use, and men having sex with men. RESULTS: In the 3-y period, there were 438 cases of VAP. Forty-seven specimens from 43 patients had quantitative microbiologic confirmation of MRSA VAP for an overall prevalence of 10.7%. Of patients with early VAP, three of 106 (2.8%) were MRSA positive. Culture results were graphed according to ventilator days ( Fig. 1 ). The median days ventilated at the time of MRSA VAP were 8 d (range 2-81). All of the early MRSA VAP patients had identifiable risk factors for MRSA infection. The negative predictive value for patients not having a risk factor was one. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the incidence of MRSA VAP is stable. Those patients with early MRSA VAP demonstrated traditional MDR risk factors. Patients without risk factors in the early time period could effectively be ruled out from having MRSA VAP and likely do not require empiric MRSA coverage.