The objectives of the present study were to investigate the carbapenemase and metallo-beta-lactamase genes of Acinetobacter baumannii clinical isolates by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and real time PCR and to determine the molecular epidemiology of the strains using the DiversiLab tool. From these data, correlations between drug resistance, resistance genes, and epidemiological clones may be revealed. The study was conducted on 125 A. baumannii collected over the 2013 year. The majority of the isolates from both intensive care unit (ICU) and non-ICU cases originated from pneumonia infections (79.2%), isolates from blood infections accounted for 17.6% and 3.2% were from meningitis infections. In the ICU cases compared with the non-ICU cases, bloodstream infections were more frequently diagnosed (19.2% vs. 11.5%). Sixty percent of A. baumannii strains were resistant to all the antimicrobials tested with the exception of colistin. All strains were susceptible to colistin and polymyxin B. Extensively drug-resistant (XDR) strains accounted for 80.8% of the isolates tested and these XDR strains were more frequently isolated from ICU cases than from non-ICU cases (93.9% vs. 30.8%). Among the 101 isolates of A. baumannii exhibiting the XDR pattern of resistance, 80 possessed the blaOXA-24 gene and 29 had the blaOXA-23 gene. Only two isolates possessed the blaVIM gene. The presence of the ISAba1element was confirmed among 10 strains from patients hospitalized in the ICU. Using repetitive extragenic palindromic sequence PCR (DiversiLab typing), six clones and 12 unique strains were identified, of which two clones dominated. Most isolates belonging to clone 1 (66.7%) and clone 2 (85.5%) were susceptible only to colistin. In summary, it is clear from our findings and those of other studies that carbapenem resistance among A. baumannii strains presents a serious clinical problem worldwide. Furthermore, the presence of XDR international clone II in ICUs poses a potential risk for future outbreaks of A. baumannii infection and controlling A. baumannii infections in hospitals presents a serious challenge.