BACKGROUND: Bacterial multidrug resistance (MDR) constitutes a major hurdle in the treatment of infectious diseases worldwide. The present study was designed to evaluate the antibacterial activities of synthetic p-toluenesulfonyl-hydrazinothiazoles against multidrug resistant Gram-negative bacteria. METHODS: The broth microdilution method was used to determine the minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC). RESULTS: The results demonstrated that the best activities were obtained with hydrazinoselenazoles. p-Chloro-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide, 4-methyl-2-[(4-chloro-benzyliden)-hydrazinyl]-1,3-selenazole, p-chloro-benzoyl-selenosemicarbazide and 4-chloromethyl-2-[(4-chlorobenziliden)-N-acetyl-hydrazinyl]-1,3-selenazole were more active than the choramphenicol on Klebsiella pneumoniae KP63. Tested alone, the lowest MIC value of 16 mg/L was obtained with p-methoxy-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide against Enterobacter aerogenes ATCC13048, K. pneumoniae ATCC112296 and KP55. Tested in the presence of an efflux pump inhibitor, phenylalanine arginine beta-naphthylamide (PAbetaN), the activity of p-chloro-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide, 4-methyl-2-[(4-chloro-benzyliden)-hydrazinyl]-1,3-selenazole, p-chloro-benzoyl-selenosemicarbazide and p-methoxy-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide significantly increased with MIC values below 10 mg/L obtained respectively on 43.8 %, 31.3 %, 62.5 % and 100 % of the 16 tested bacterial strains. The lowest MIC value of 0.5 mg/L in the presence of PAbetaN was recorded with p-chloro-benzoyl-selenosemicarbazide against Escherichia coli ATCC8739 and KP55 as well as p-methoxy-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide against E. aerogenes KP55. p-Chloro-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide and p-chloro-benzoyl-selenosemicarbazide contained the same pharmacophore as p-methoxy-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide. CONCLUSION: This study indicates that p-chloro-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide, p-chloro-benzoyl-selenosemicarbazide and p-methoxy-benzyliden-selenosemicarbazide could be explored more to develop novel antimicrobial drugs to fight MDR bacterial infections.