OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor alpha receptor-antibody fusion protein (rhTNFR: Fc) to the Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection status and liver function of Spondyloarthritis (SpA) patients under different HBV infection status. METHODS: Active SpA patients with normal liver function were enrolled in Sun Yat-sen Memorial hospital from February 2012 to August 2014. All were treated with rhTNFR: Fc based therapy (monotherapy or combined therapy) for at least 12 weeks. SpA disease activity, HBV infection status and liver function were evaluated at each interview (baseline, 4(th) and 12(th) week, as primary endpoint). Part of the patients were evaluated at 24(th) week with or without extended rhTNFR: Fc treatment(as secondary endpoint) based on their choice. RESULTS: Eighty-one patients who completed 12-week follow-up visit were divided into chronic HBV carrier group (n=21), past HBV exposure group (n=25) and free of HBV infection group (n=35). Alanine transaminase (ALT) elevated (no more than 3-fold of normal) in 3 patients from 3 groups respectively at 4th week. During 24-week follow-up, none in past HBV exposure group or in free of HBV infection group developed HBV reactivation or HBV infection; and 4 patients in chronic HBV carrier group developed HBV reactivation without more than 2-fold of normalelevation of ALT. Among 7 patients with negative baseline HBV-DNA and without antiviral prophylaxis, 2 patients developed HBV reactivation at 10(th) 24(th) week of rhTNFR: Fc therapy respectively and 1 patient developed reactivation at 16(th) week (12-week rhTNFR: Fc+ thalidomide therapy and following 4-week thalidomide monotherapy), whose HBV-DNA load returned to normal spontaneously or after antiviral therapy. Four chronic HBV carriers with low-load of baseline HBV-DNA did not develop reactivation. One of 9 chronic HBV carriers with high-load of baseline HBV-DNA developed reactivation due to resistance of antiviral prophylaxis. CONCLUSIONS: Short-term rhTNFR: Fc based therapy may induce mild and transient HBV reactivation, usually without hepatitis.