Oritavancin possesses activity against vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) and methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA).In vitrodata suggest synergy between beta-lactams (BLs) and vancomycin or daptomycin, agents similar to oritavancin. We evaluated the activities of BLs combined with oritavancin against MRSA and VRE. Oritavancin MICs were determined for 30 strains, 5 each of MRSA, daptomycin-nonsusceptible (DNS) MRSA, vancomycin-intermediate MRSA (VISA), heteroresistant VISA (hVISA), vancomycin-resistantEnterococcus faecalis, and vancomycin-resistantEnterococcus faecium Oritavancin MICs were determined in the presence of subinhibitory concentrations of BLs. Oritavancin combined with ceftaroline, cefazolin, or nafcillin was evaluated for lethal synergy against MRSA, and oritavancin combined with ceftaroline, ampicillin, or ertapenem was evaluated for lethal synergy against VRE in 24-h time-kill assays. Oritavancin at 0.5x the MIC was combined with BLs at 0.5x the MIC or the biological free peak concentration, whichever one was lower. Synergy was defined as a >/=2-log10-CFU/ml difference between the killing achieved with the combination and that achieved with the most active single agent at 24 h. Oritavancin MICs were </=0.125 mug/ml for all MRSA isolates except three VISA isolates with MICs of 0.25 mug/ml. Oritavancin MICs for VRE ranged from 0.03 to 0.125 mug/ml. Oritavancin in combination with ceftaroline was synergistic against all MRSA phenotypes and statistically superior to all other combinations against DNS MRSA, hVISA, and MRSA isolates (P< 0.02). Oritavancin in combination with cefazolin and oritavancin in combination with nafcillin were also synergistic against all MRSA strains. Synergy between oritavancin and all BLs was revealed against VRE strain 8019, while synergy between oritavancin and ampicillin or ertapenem but not ceftaroline was demonstrated against VRE strain R7164. The data support the potential use of oritavancin in combination with BLs, especially oritavancin in combination with ceftaroline, for the treatment of infections caused by MRSA. The data from the present study are not as strong for oritavancin in combination with BLs for VRE. Further study of both MRSA and VRE in more complex models is warranted.