BACKGROUND: Classical strains of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (Typhimurium) predominantly cause a self-limiting diarrheal illness in humans and a systemic disease in mice. In this study, we report the characterization of a strain isolated from a blood-culture taken from a 15-year old woman suffering from invasive severe salmonellosis, refractory to conventional therapy with extended-spectrum cephalosporin (ESC). RESULTS: The strain, named 33676, was characterized as multidrug-resistant Salmonella serogroup A by biochemical, antimicrobial and serological tests. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and XbaI macrorestrictions (PFGE) showed that strain 33676 belonged to the Typhimurium ST213 genotype, previously described for other Mexican Typhimurium strains. PCR analyses revealed the presence of IncA/C, IncFIIA and ColE1-like plasmids and the absence of the Salmonella virulence plasmid (pSTV). Conjugation assays showed that the ESC-resistance gene bla CMY-2 was carried on the conjugative IncF plasmid, instead of the IncA/C plasmid, as found in previously studied ST213 strains. Although the IncA/C plasmid conferred most of the observed antimicrobial resistances it was not self-conjugative; it was rather able to conjugate by co-integrating with the IncF plasmid. Strain 33676 was fully attenuated for virulence in BALB/c mice infections. Both type-three secretion system (T3SS), encoded in Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 2 (SPI-1 and SPI-2), were functional in the 33676 strain and, interestingly, this strain produced the H2 FljB flagellin instead of the H1 FliC flagellin commonly expressed by S. enterica strains. CONCLUSIONS: Strain 33676 showed two main features that differentiate it from the originally described ST213 strains: 1) the bla CMY-2 gene was not carried on the IncA/C plasmid, but on a conjugative IncF plasmid, which may open a new route of dissemination for this ESC-resistance gene, and 2) it expresses the H2 FljB flagella, in contrast with the other ST213 and most Typhimurium reference strains. To our knowledge this is the first report of an IncF bla CMY-2-carrying plasmid in Salmonella.