Osteomyelitis, an infectious disease predominantly tied to poor sanitary conditions in underdeveloped regions of the world, is in need of inexpensive, easily in situ synthesizable and administrable materials for its treatment. The results of this study stem from the attempt to create one such affordable and minimally invasive therapeutic platform in the form of a self-setting, injectable cement with a tunable drug release profile, composed of only nanoparticulate hydroxyapatite, the synthetic version of the bone mineral. Cements comprised two separately synthesized hydroxyapatite powders, one of which, HAP2, was precipitated abruptly, retaining the amorphous nature longer, and the other one of which, HAP1, was precipitated at a slower rate, more rapidly transitioning to the crystalline structure. Cements were made with four different weight ratios of the two hydroxyapatite components: 100/0, 85/15, 50/50, and 0/100 with respect to HAP1 and HAP2. Both the setting and the release rates measured on two different antibiotics, vancomycin and ciprofloxacin, were controlled using the weight ratio of the two hydroxyapatite components. Various inorganic powder properties were formerly used to control drug release, but here we demonstrate for the first time that the kinetics of the mechanism of formation of a solid compound can be controlled to produce tunable drug release profiles. Specifically, it was found that the longer the precursor calcium phosphate component of the cement retains the amorphous nature of the primary precipitate, the more active it was in terms of speeding up the diffusional release of the adsorbed drug. The setting rate was, in contrast, inversely proportional to the release rate and to the content of this active hydroxyapatite component, HAP2. The empirical release profiles were fitted to a set of equations that could be used to tune the release rate to the therapeutic occasion. All of the cements loaded with vancomycin or ciprofloxacin inhibited the growth of Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-negative Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in both agar diffusion assays and broth dilution tests with intensities either comparable to the antibiotic per se, as in the case of ciprofloxacin, or even larger than the antibiotic alone, as in the case of vancomycin. Interestingly, even the pure cements exhibited an antibacterial effect ranging from moderate to strong, while demonstrating high levels of biocompatibility with osteoclastic RAW264.7 cells and only slightly affecting the viability of the osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells, in direct proportion with the amount of the more active hydroxyapatite component in the cements. This antibacterial effect was especially noticeable against Gram-negative bacteria, where the growth inhibition by the cements was comparable to or even stronger than that of the pure antibiotics. The antibiofilm assay against P. aeruginosa biofilms reiterated the antibiotic effectiveness of pure, antibiotic-free cements. That the carrier per se, composed of a nontoxic, easily prepared, bone mineral composite, can exhibit a strong antibacterial effect even in the absence of an antibiotic drug is an insight highly relevant in view of the rising resistance of an array of pathogens to traditional antibiotic therapies and the demands for the timely development of suitable alternatives.