Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most aggressive lung cancer subtype and accounts for more than 15% of all lung cancer cases. Cisplatin [cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (CDDP)]-based combination chemotherapy is the cornerstone for all stages of SCLC. However, acquired multidrug resistance (MDR) and intolerable toxicities lead to a high mortality rate in SCLC patients. Gallic acid [3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid (GA)] is a natural botanic phenolic compound which can induce cell apoptosis in several types of cancers. In the present study, we aimed to explore the anticancer effects of GA on human SCLC H446 cells and its promotive effects on the anticancer activities of cisplatin. The viability of the H446 cells was analyzed by MTT assay. Morphological changes in the H446 cells were observed under an inverted microscope. Apoptosis induction was determined by Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)/propidium iodide (PI) staining. The level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was assessed by 2'7'-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFHDA), mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) by JC-1, and western blotting was used to examine the expression of mitochondrial apoptosis-related proteins. The results showed that both GA and cisplatin changed the morphology, inhibited the growth and induced apoptosis in the H446 cells by inducing generation of ROS, disruption of MMP, downregulation of XIAP expression, and upregulation of Bax, Apaf-1, DIABLO and p53 expression. More importantly, GA combined with cisplatin exhibited synergistic effects on inducing of these pro-apoptotic mediators and modulating the activation of apoptosis-related molecules. However, inhibition of the generation of ROS by N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC), a specific ROS inhibitor, reversed the cell apoptosis induced by cisplatin combined with GA. In conclusion, the results from the present study revealed that GA exhibited an anticancer effect on human SCLC H446 cells and enhanced the antitumor activities of cisplatin via the ROS-dependent mitochondrial apoptotic pathway.