A growing issue of pathogen resistance to antibiotics has fostered the development of innovative approaches for novel drug development. Here, we report the physicochemical and biological properties of an antifungal peptide, MMGP1, based on computational analysis. Computation of physicochemical properties has revealed that the natural biological activities of MMGP1 are coordinated by its intrinsic properties such as net positive charge (+5.04), amphipathicity, high hydrophobicity, low hydrophobic moment, and higher isoelectric point (11.915). Prediction of aggregation hot spots in MMGP1 had revealed the presence of potentially aggregation-prone segments that can nucleate in vivo aggregation (on the membrane), whereas no aggregating regions were predicted for in vitro aggregation (in solutions) of MMGP1. This ability of MMGP1 to form oligomeric aggregates on membrane further substantiates its direct-cell penetrating potency. Monte Carlo simulation of the interactions of MMGP1 in the aqueous phase and different membrane environments revealed that increasing the proportion of acidic lipids on membrane had led to increase in the peptide helicity. Furthermore, the peptide adopts energetically favorable transmembrane configuration, by inserting peptide loop and helix termini into the membrane containing >60% of anionic lipids. The charged lipid-based insertion of MMGP1 into membrane might be responsible for the selectivity of peptide toward fungal cells. Additionally, MMGP1 possessed DNA-binding property. Computational docking has identified DNA-binding residues (TRP3, SER4, MET7, ARG8, PHE10, ALA11, GLY20, THR21, ARG22, MET23, TRP34, and LYS36) in MMGP1 crucial for its DNA-binding property. Furthermore, computational mutation analysis revealed that aromatic amino acids are crucial for in vivo aggregation, membrane insertion, and DNA-binding property of MMGP1. These data provide new insight into the molecular determinants of MMGP1 antifungal activity and also serves as the template for the design of novel peptide antibiotics.