Multidrug-resistant (MDR) Enterobacteriaceae infections are increasing in U.S. children; however, there is a paucity of multicentered analyses of antibiotic resistance genes responsible for MDR phenotypes among pediatric Enterobacteriaceae isolates. In this study, 225 isolates phenotypically identified as extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) or carbapenemase producers, recovered from children ages 0 to 18 years hospitalized between January 2011 and April 2015 at three Chicago area hospitals, were analyzed. We used DNA microarray platforms to detect ESBL, plasmid-mediated AmpC (pAmpC), and carbapenemase type beta-lactamase (bla) genes. Repetitive-sequence-based PCR and multilocus sequence typing (MLST) were performed to assess isolate similarity. Plasmid replicon typing was conducted to classify plasmids. The median patient age was 4.2 years, 56% were female, and 44% presented in the outpatient setting. The majority (60.9%) of isolates were Escherichia coli and from urinary sources (69.8%). Of 225 isolates exhibiting ESBL- or carbapenemase-producing phenotypes, 90.7% contained a bla gene. The most common genotype was the blaCTX-M-1 group (49.8%); 1.8% were carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (three blaKPC and one blaIMP). Overall, pAmpC (blaACT/MIR and blaCMY) were present in 14.2%. The predominant E. coli phylogenetic group was the virulent B2 group (67.6%) associated with ST43/ST131 (Pasteur/Achtman MLST scheme) containing the blaCTX-M-1 group (84%), and plasmid replicon types FIA, FII, and FIB. K. pneumoniae harboring blaKPC were non-ST258 with replicon types I1 and A/C. Enterobacter spp. carrying blaACT/MIR contained plasmid replicon FIIA. We found that beta-lactam resistance in children is diverse and that certain resistance mechanisms differ from known circulating genotypes in adults in an endemic area. The potential impact of complex molecular types and the silent dissemination of MDR Enterobacteriaceae in a vulnerable population needs to be studied further.