BACKGROUND: Acne is a prominent skin condition affecting >80% of teenagers and young adults and ~650 million people globally. Isotretinoin, a vitamin A derivative, is currently the standard of care for treatment. However, it has a well-established teratogenic activity, a reason for the development of novel and low-risk treatment options for acne. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effectiveness of Zolav((R)), (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) [corrected] a novel antibiotic as a treatment for acne vulgaris. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Minimum inhibitory concentration of Zolav((R)) (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) against Propionibacterium acnes was determined by following a standard protocol using Mueller-Hinton broth and serial dilutions in a 96-well plate. Cytotoxicity effects on human umbilical vein endothelial cells and lung cells in the presence of Zolav((R)) (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) were investigated by determining the growth inhibition (GI50) concentration, total growth inhibition concentration, and the lethal concentration of 50% (LC50). The tryptophan auxotrophic mutant of Escherichia coli strain, WP2 uvrA (ATCC 49979), was used for the AMES assay with the addition of Zolav((R)) (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) tested for its ability to reverse the mutation and induce bacterial growth. The in vivo effectiveness of Zolav((R)) (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) was tested in a P. acnes mouse intradermal model where the skin at the infection site was removed, homogenized, and subjected to colony-forming unit (CFU) counts. RESULTS: Susceptibility testing of Zolav((R)) (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) against P. acnes showed a minimum inhibitory concentration of 2 microg/mL against three strains with no cytotoxicity and no mutagenicity observed at the highest concentrations tested, 30 microM and 1,500 microg/plate, respectively. The use of Zolav((R)) (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) at a concentration of 50 microg/mL (q8h) elicited a two-log difference in CFU/g between the treatment group and the control. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the potential of Zolav((R)) (a p-carboethoxy-tristyrylbenzene derivative) as a novel treatment for acne vulgaris.