AIM: To calculate the incremental cost of nosocomial bacteremia caused by the most common organisms, classified by their antimicrobial susceptibility. METHODS: We selected patients who developed nosocomial bacteremia caused by Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These microorganisms were analyzed because of their high prevalence and they frequently present multidrug resistance. A control group consisted of patients classified within the same all-patient refined-diagnosis related group without bacteremia. Our hospital has an established cost accounting system (full-costing) that uses activity-based criteria to analyze cost distribution. A logistic regression model was fitted to estimate the probability of developing bacteremia for each admission (propensity score) and was used for propensity score matching adjustment. Subsequently, the propensity score was included in an econometric model to adjust the incremental cost of patients who developed bacteremia, as well as differences in this cost, depending on whether the microorganism was multidrug-resistant or multidrug-sensitive. RESULTS: A total of 571 admissions with bacteremia matched the inclusion criteria and 82,022 were included in the control group. The mean cost was euro 25,891 for admissions with bacteremia and euro 6,750 for those without bacteremia. The mean incremental cost was estimated at euro 15,151 (CI, euro 11,570 to euro 18,733). Multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa bacteremia had the highest mean incremental cost, euro 44,709 (CI, euro 34,559 to euro 54,859). Antimicrobial-susceptible E. coli nosocomial bacteremia had the lowest mean incremental cost, euro 10,481 (CI, euro 8,752 to euro 12,210). Despite their lower cost, episodes of antimicrobial-susceptible E. coli nosocomial bacteremia had a major impact due to their high frequency. CONCLUSIONS: Adjustment of hospital cost according to the organism causing bacteremia and antibiotic sensitivity could improve prevention strategies and allow their prioritization according to their overall impact and costs. Infection reduction is a strategy to reduce resistance.