BACKGROUND: Antimicrobial resistance presents a threat to quality patient care. Knowledge of localantibacterial susceptibility patterns can guide clinicians in empiric antibacterial administration andassist pharmacists and infectious disease physicians in development of appropriate therapeutic pathways. METHODS: To characterize Wisconsin antibacterial susceptibility patterns and elucidate geographicor temporal variation in antibacterial resistance, a retrospective, observational analysis of antibiogram data was performed. Seventy-two members of the Wisconsin Clinical Laboratory Network(WCLN) submitted antibiograms describing clinically significant isolates tested in calendar year 2013 to the WCLN Laboratory Technical Advisory Group. RESULTS: In the context of commonly reported antibacterial agents, data were compiled for approximately 75,800 isolates of Escherichia coi; 13,300 Klebsiella pneumoniae; 6300 Proteus mirobilis;2800 Enterobacter cloacae; 8400 Pseudomonas aeruginosa; 30,000 S aureus; 11,200 coagulase-negative Staphylococcus spp; and 13,800 Enterococcus spp. P mirobilis isolates from northern Wisconsin were more likely to demonstrate resistance than those in the southern region. In contrast, P aeruginosa isolates from southern Wisconsin had decreased susceptibility to a number ofagents when compared to other regions. Temporal trending in decreased E coli and P mirabilis susceptibility to fluoroquinolones and trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole was observed. Increased methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus oureus (MRSA) rates were observed in northwest and southeastWisconsin. In general, northeast Wisconsin exhibited less frequency of antibacterial resistance. CONCLUSIONS: Geographic variation exists with respect to antibacterial resistance, particularly inareas of Wisconsin adjacent to large population centers of neighboring states. Antibacterial surveillance in Wisconsin is indicated on a regular basis to assess emerging trends in antibacterial resistance. Existing WCLN infrastructure allows for such investigations.