PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of autoclave sterilization on surface characteristics and cyclic fatigue resistance of 3 types of nickel-titanium rotary instruments (K3, Mtwo, ProTaper). METHODS: Three brands of NiTi rotary endodontic instruments of the same size (tip diameter 0.25 mm and constant 0.06 taper) were selected: K3, Mtwo and Protaper (F2). 24 instruments for each brand were used to evaluate the effects of autoclave sterilization on inner character in the as-received condition and after subjection to 0, 1, 5, and 10 sterilization cycles (6 for each group). Time to fracture (TtF) from the start of the test to the moment of file breakage and the length of the fractured fragment were recorded. Means and standard deviations of TtF and fragment length were calculated. The data was analyzed with SPSS13.0 software package. Another 12 NiTi rotary instruments for each brand were used, 6 subjected to 10 autoclave sterilization cycles and the other as control. Scanning electron microscope was used to observe the changes in surface topography and inner character. RESULTS: For cyclic fatigue resistance, when sterilization was not performed, K3 showed the highest value of TtF means and ProTaper the lowest. The differences between each brand were statistically significant (P<0.05).When disinfection was performed, K3 brand showed greater fatigue resistance in comparison with the control when autoclave sterilization cycled 5 times and 10 times. The difference between 10 cycles of sterilization and the control was statistically significant (P<0.05); ProTaper brand showed significantly greater fatigue resistance in all the disinfected groups compared with the control (P<0.05) and 5 cycles of sterilization led to the greatest increment; The fatigue resistance of Mtwo brands increased with sterilization cycles and the difference between 5/10 cycles and the control were statistically significant (P<0.05). For surface characteristics, under scanning electron microscope, surface and inner imperfections in all instruments were intensified greatly after 10 cycles of sterilization. CONCLUSIONS: Cycle fatigue resistance is different among instruments of different brands. Autoclave sterilization may increase fatigue resistance of the 3 brands. Autoclave sterilization may increase the surface roughness and inner defects in cross section.