Staphylococcus aureus is one of the most important bacterial pathogens in clinical practice and a major diagnostic focus for the routine microbiology laboratory. It is carried as a harmless commensal in up to two-thirds of the population at any one time predominantly not only in the anterior nares, but also in multiple other sites such as the groin, axilla, throat, perineum, vagina and rectum. It colonizes skin breach sites, such as ulcers and wounds, and causes superficial and deep skin and soft tissue infections and life-threatening deep seated infections particularly endocarditis and osteomyelitis. S. aureus is constantly evolving through mutation and uptake of mobile genetic elements that confer increasing resistance and virulence. Since the 1960s, hospitals have had to contend with emergence of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains that spread better in hospitals than methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) and are harder to treat. Since the 1980s, distinct community MRSA strains have also emerged that cause severe skin and respiratory infections. Conventional identification of MSSA and MRSA in the microbiology laboratory involves microscopy, culture and biochemical analysis that for most samples is straightforward but slow, taking at least 48 h. This delay has significant consequences for individual patient care and public health, through inadequate or excessive empiric antibiotic use, and failure to implement appropriate infection control measures for MRSA-colonized patients during those first 48 h. This unmet need has driven development of rapid molecular diagnostics that either complement or replace conventional culture techniques in the laboratory, or can be placed in the clinical environment as point-of-care (POC) devices. These new technologies provide results to clinicians anything from within an hour to 24 h, depending on sample and clinical setting, and should transform management of patients with S. aureus and other bacterial diseases; however, uptake is often slow due to the disruptive effect of new technologies, costs of transition and uncertainty of the optimal solution given successive advances. More evidence of the health economic, clinical and antimicrobial resistance benefit will help support introduction of these new technologies. Finally, preventing MRSA transmission has been a priority for healthcare organizations for many years. There have been significant recent reductions in transmission following local and national campaigns to re-enforce basic and heightened infection control interventions such as universal hand hygiene, barrier nursing, decolonization and isolation of MRSA-colonized patients detected through routine culture or screening policies. Developments in whole genome sequencing are providing greater insight into reservoirs and routes of transmission that should help better target interventions to ensure sustainable control of endemic strains and to identify and prevent emergence of new strains.