BACKGROUND: Acute epididymitis is an inflammation of the epididymis. It mostly occurs unilaterally and may spread to the testis ('epididymo-orchitis') if untreated. Increasing technological advances allow for an even more detailed examination of concurrent symptoms such as ejaculate changes and the whole spectrum of pathogenic agents, which ranges from sexually transmitted pathogens such as Chlamydia and gonococci to enterobacteria and, rarely, viruses. This review summarises major aspects of the disease including the latest scientific findings. METHODS: A selective literature search including the last 40 years was performed via Medline. RESULTS: With about 400 cases a year in 100 000 men, acute epididymitis is the most common urogenital infection in men. It occurs across all age groups including children. Despite the fact that bacterial ascension is aetiologically of utmost relevance, only one out of three men reports signs of dysuria or urethritis. In young, sexually active men, sexually transmitted pathogens are regularly found in addition to the characteristic enterobacteriae, even if these men have an unremarkable sexual history. 88% of epididymal abscess formations can be successfully treated without surgery. Patients with indwelling urethral catheters are at a high risk of multiple drug resistance and should be treated empirically with both a fluoroquinolone and a third-generation cephalosporin until antimicrobial susceptibility testing has been completed. About 40 out of 100 patients develop post-inflammatory sub-fertility. Here, virulence factors like haemolysin A produced by uropathogenic E. coli have a negative impact on semen parameters compared to those patients suffering from epididymitis induced by haemolysin A negative strains. With adequate antibiotic treatment there is no evidence for testicular atrophy. Only one out of 10 men relapses. These cases should be examined thoroughly for subvesical obstruction. Some of them may benefit from prophylactic vasectomy. CONCLUSIONS: This review presents key aspects of acute epididymitis, which are increasingly adopted in updated guidelines.