BACKGROUND: Severe cases of infections caused by Raoultella planticola are constantly being reported from all over the world with the increase in drug-resistance patterns. In this study, we retrospectively evaluated the clinical characteristics of R. planticola infections with patients' demographics and antimicrobial susceptibilities of the R. planticola isolates. METHODS: R. planticola isolates were retrospectively evaluated. VITEK 2((R)) automated system was used for identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Verification of the low-discriminated isolates was analyzed with MALDI-TOF method using VITEK MS((R)) system. Gene-Xpert((R)) system was used for detection of bla IMP-1-, bla KPC-, bla NDM-1-, bla OXA-48- and bla VIM-type carbapenemases. The data of the patients with R. planticola infection were collected from hospital records. RESULT: During the 4-year period, 42 episodes of R. planticola infections were detected. MALDI-TOF was used for 11 of the low-discriminated isolates, and 1 of which identified as R. terrigena was excluded. Carbapenems and aminoglycosides were the most effective antimicrobial agents. Extended spectrum beta-lactamases were detected in seven of the isolates. Three carbapenem-resistant isolates were detected as bla OXA-48-type carbapenemase carrier. Nosocomial R. planticola infections constituted 80.9 % (n = 34) of the infections. Most common infections related with R. planticola were blood stream infections (n = 24) (p < 0.005). The presence of indwelling catheter and intensive care unit stay were the most common detected risk factors (p < 0.005). Diabetes mellitus and chronic renal insufficiency commonly accompanied the infections (p > 0.005). CONCLUSIONS: Challenging infections caused by Raoultella spp., like those of multidrug resistant Klebsiella spp., will probably become a concern for clinicians as well as microbiologists . In literature, there were few cases, but we believe that the incidence of Raoultella spp. infections, which may result from misidentification, are more common than expected , and it is not unlikely that there will be a gradual increase and spread in multidrug-resistant isolates.