INTRODUCTION: Staphylococci are the most common pathogens causing orthopaedic device-related infections (ODRI). The treatment of these infections often involves multiple surgical procedures combined with systemic antibiotic therapy to treat the infection and restore functionality. Older patients frequently present with a compromised health-status and/or low bone quality, and despite growing importance their outcomes are not well described to date. The primary aim of the current study is to describe outcomes in older patients with ODRIs and to determine if they demonstrate lower cure rates and greater risk for complications in contrast to younger patients. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients treated with an ODRI of the lower extremity at our institution were included in this study. Demographic data, comorbidities and infecting organisms were recorded. Older adult patients were defined as those aged 60 and older. At two-year follow-up post-discharge, we recorded the clinical course, the Lower-Extremity-Functional-Score, the patient reported general health status (SF-12-questionnaire) and the status of infection. The antibiotic resistance pattern of the disease causing pathogens was analysed and compared between the two age groups. RESULTS: In total, 163 patients (age: 19-94 years) with a staphylococcal ODRI were included. Sixty-four of these infections occurred in older patients, which showed a significantly higher mortality rate (9%). Within follow-up period recurrence of infection occurred significantly more frequently in younger patients (41%) than in older patients (17%). At two-years follow-up cure, which was defined as eradication of infection and terminated therapy, was achieved in 78% of younger and 75% of older patients. However, an ODRI resulted in older patients in a significantly worse functional outcome and impaired physical quality of live, as well as more frequently in an on-going infection, such as a persisting fistula (14% versus 3% in younger patients). Disease causing staphylococci, isolated from older patients showed more frequently a methicillin or multi-drug resistance than those associated with infections in younger patients. CONCLUSIONS: ODRIs in older patients demonstrated higher morality rates rate, poor functional outcome and higher rates of persistent infections. A compromised health status and a poor bone quality may play a crucial role in this specific patient cohort.