The aim of this study was to investigate the protective effects of dietary administration of commercial prebiotic, Immunogen, on immunological indicators, enzymatic responses and stress tolerance in juvenile (81.65 +/- 1.49) rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) following Aeromonas hydrophila infection. The first group of fish was fed with the diet containing 2 g kg(-1) Immunogen whilst the control group received the diet free of Immunogen. There were three replicates per group. After 6 weeks feeding, the control group were divided into two treatments injected with saline buffer (control), and 1.5 x 10(8) CFU A. hydrophila respectively. The fish fed with the Immunogen supplemented diet were also injected with 1.5 x 10(8) CFU A. hydrophila. Our results revealed that dietary Immunogen increased the level of white blood cell (WBC) and percentage of lymphocyte (P < 0.05), however, the level of red blood cell (RBC), Hematocrit (Hct), hemoglobin (Hb) and percent of monocyte decreased in Untreated-Challenged group but unaffected in the group fed with Immunogen (P < 0.05). The level of lysozyme, alternative complement, antiprotease activity, total protein, albumin and globulin decreased in Untreated- Challenged group compared to control group. However, there was an increase in the level of lysozyme, alternative complement, antiprotease activity, bactericidal activity, in the Treated- Challenged group compared to other groups (P < 0.05). Serum alkali phosphatase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase, significantly increased fallowing challenge with A. hydrophila but in the Treated-Challenged group, there was no significant difference compared to the control group (P < 0.05). Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was not different between groups (P > 0.05). Serum cortisol and glucose levels were higher in the challenge group, but these levels were lower in fish under challenge that were fed Immunogen-supplemented diet in contrast to the group fed control diet. The stress responses affected by A. hydrophila challenge (P < 0.05). Serum sodium, potassium and calcium concentration decreased by A. hydrophila exposure (P < 0.05), and Immunogen showed protection effect against this change.