OBJECTIVE: To assess CD4 T-cell responsiveness to IL-7 and IFN-alpha in HIV-infected patients who experience poor recovery of CD4 T-cell counts during therapy (immune failure patients). DESIGN: Responses to IL-7 and IFN-alpha were compared between HIV-infected immune failure (CD4 cell counts <379 cells/mul) patients and immune success (CD4 cell counts >500 cells/mul) as well as healthy control patients. METHODS: Flow cytometry was used to assess peripheral blood mononuclear cells for IL-7-induced proliferation, CD25 expression, and signaling (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 phosphorylation and Akt phosphorylation) in CD4 T cells. Freshly isolated cells were characterized by expression of IL-7Ralpha (CD127) among CD4 T-cell maturation subsets by flow cytometry and sorted CD3 T cells were assessed for expression of IFN-alpha and interferon stimulated genes (2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase-1 and myxovirus resistance A protein) by quantitative real-time PCR. Responses to IFN-alpha were assessed by induction of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 phosphorylation and inhibition of IL-7-induced CD4 T-cell proliferation. RESULTS: IL-7-induced proliferation and CD25 expression were decreased in CD4 T cells from immune failure patients. CD127 expressing CD4 T cells were decreased, whereas expression of 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase-1, myxovirus resistance A protein, and IFN-alpha mRNA were increased in total CD3 T cells from immune failure patients. CD127 expression correlated with CD25 induction but not proliferation, whereas T-cell IFN-alpha mRNA was associated with reduced proliferation in CD4 T cells from immune failure patients. IFN-alpha-mediated induction of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 phosphorylation and inhibition of proliferation were not diminished in CD4 T cells from immune failure patients. CONCLUSION: IL-7 responsiveness is impaired in immune failure patients and may be related to expression of CD127 and IFN-alpha.