This work compares the surface modifications induced by the immersion in solutions that simulate inflammatory conditions of pure titanium (cpTi) and medical grade stainless steel (SS). The inflammatory conditions were simulated using a mixture of Hartman solution and 50mM of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) at pH=5.2. The samples were immersed by 7days refreshing the solution every day to keep the reactivity of the H2O2. The surface characteristics that were investigated were: elemental composition by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS); topography by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and profilometry; wettability and surface energy by sessile drop contact angle and point of zero charge by titration. Moreover, the variations in the electrochemical response were evaluated by open circuit potential (OCP), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and potentiodynamic polarization (PP) performed before and after the treatment using the Hartman solution as the electrolyte. The XPS results indicated that for both metallic samples, oxidation of the surface was promoted and/or the oxide layer was thicker after the immersion. The roughness and the solid-liquid surface energy were increased; the samples showed a more hydrophilic character after the treatment. However, the surface energy of the solid estimated using the Van Oss-Chaudhury-Good approach showed different trends between the cpTi and the SS surfaces; the polar component decreased for cpTi, while it increased for SS. Finally, the electrochemical results indicated that the corrosion resistance (Rcor) and the pore resistance (Rpo) significantly decreased for cpTi, while both resistances were not significantly different for the SS. This is indicative of a higher dissolution of the cpTi compared to SS and the lower Rpo means that the species are easily transported through the surface layer, which can be explained in terms of the formation of a porous TiOx layer, not observed on the SS. The cpTi surface suffered from a dissolution/oxidation process that allows its integration with the surrounding media, while the SS remained completely passive and this different response might be related to their distinguished clinical outcome.