OBJECTIVES: Single-agent chemotherapy has been the standard of treatment for nonmetastatic and metastatic low-risk gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). However, it is estimated that approximately 12% to 32% of patients given single-agent therapy will require a change of chemotherapy regimen because of drug resistance and/or intolerable toxicity. The Section of Trophoblastic Diseases of the Philippine General Hospital started using the combination of etoposide-actinomycin (EA) as salvage chemotherapy in the early 2000s. This study was carried out to describe the local experience with this salvage chemotherapy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a retrospective descriptive study aimed to analyze the efficacy and safety of the EA regimen as salvage treatment for the management of nonmetastatic and low-risk metastatic GTN. Records of the Section of Trophoblastic Diseases of the Philippine General Hospital from January 1, 2002 to June 30, 2014 were reviewed to identify all patients who had a diagnosis of nonmetastatic and metastatic low-risk GTN. Primary remission rate and toxicity profile of all patients who received the EA regimen as salvage treatment were determined. RESULTS: During the study period, a total of 67 cycles of the EA regimen were administered to 15 patients as salvage chemotherapy. Patients received a median of 4 cycles of EA, attaining normal serum beta human chorionic gonadotropin after 2 to 3 cycles. Thirteen of the 15 patients achieved complete remission with the EA regimen, giving a remission rate of 87%. The major toxicity that the patients experienced was myelosuppression. Grade 1/2 anemia was addressed by blood transfusion. Grade 3 neutropenia/myelosuppression was addressed by the administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Alopecia was seen in all of the patients. One patient experienced dermatitis with accompanying myelosuppression. CONCLUSION: The EA regimen was efficacious and well tolerated for the treatment of refractory nonmetastatic and low- risk metastatic GTN.