INTRODUCTION: A urinary tract infection (UTI) is a frequent pathology in outpatients and admitted patients as well. In recent years, there has been an increase in the resistance of germs responsible for UTI to tested antibiotics, particularly because of the emergence of Enterobacteria secreting extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL). OBJECTIVE: The aim of this work was to study the epidemiology of germs responsible for urinary tract infections and their antibiotic sensitivity at three clinical laboratories in the city of Nouakchott (Mauritania) in all patients presenting to these laboratories for urine culture during a period of six months. METHODS: This is a prospective study conducted at three clinical laboratories in Nouakchott, over a period of six months from January 1st to June 30th 2014 for all patients coming to these laboratories for urinalysis test during this period. The culture was performed according to the usual techniques, and the antibiogram was done according to the recommendations of the Antibiogram Committee of the French Society of Microbiology. The statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics 20. RESULTS: From 3082 urine exam, 568 were positive, which means 18.4%. These infections were for hospitalized patients (17.8%) and outpatients in particular (82.2%). Sex ratio F/M was 1.6. The epidemiology of urinary tract infections in these three medical analysis laboratories is comparable to the past studies data regarding age, sex, and the bacteria, the most frequently responsible (Escherichia coli 64.4%). But differences in the resistance of E. coli are observed: higher resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics, the quinolones, the fluoroquinolones, and cotrimoxazol. UTI was common in patients with urinary catheter (64.9%), diabetics (52.4%), hospitalized patients (49.3%) and pregnant women (38.7%). The prevalence of urinary tract infections caused by Enterobacteria ESBL in our study was 12.8%, of all urinary tract infections caused by Enterobacteria; 10.4 and 20.4% of the E. coli and Klebsiella spp, respectively produced a ESBL. CONCLUSION: The distribution of germs in our study is comparable to the literature, however, antibiotic resistance is higher in our study, which is probably a result of the inappropriate use of these drugs in our country, therefore it is important for us to create a good strategy to supply and distribute these drugs, as well as the review of the empirical treatment of UTI in our country. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4.