BACKGROUND: The resistance of bacteria causing urinary tract infection (UTI) to commonly prescribed antibiotics is increasing both in developing and developed countries. Resistance has emerged even to more potent antimicrobial agents. This study was undertaken to determine the current antibiotic resistance pattern among common bacterial uropathogens in St.paul's Hospital Millennium Medical College. METHODS: Using cross sectional study design, a total of 217 female and 207 male participants were consecutively recruited. Mid-urine samples were collected from all patients using wide mouthed urine cup. Inoculation was performed onto blood agar and MacConkey agar symoultaniously, and isolated organisms were identified by conventional methods. Antibiotic susceptibility was done by Kirby Bauer disk diffusion method. Thirteen different antibiotics representing different families of antibiotics were tested on all isolated organisms. RESULTS: Of the total 424 samples, 95(22.4%) showed significant growth. Gram negative organisms totaled 85(20.05%), and 10(2.4%) isolates were gram positive. The most frequently isolated gram negative bacterium was E. coli followed by Protues and Klebsiella spp. 53(12.5%), 8(8.4%), and 7(7.4%) respectively. Resistance to Tetracyclin, Ampicilin, Amoxycilin and Nalidixic Acid was more than 70% of all isolates of E.coli strains. There was relatively low resistance rate to Nitrofurantoin, Gentamycin and Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole. However, there was emerging resistance to Ciprofloxacilin and Ceftriaxone especially for common bacteruria. CONCLUSION: In this study setting, resistant rates to Tetracyclin, Ampicilin, Amoxycilin and Nalidixic Acid were high. Since most isolates were sensitive for Nitrofurantoin, Gentamycin and Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole, they are considered as appropriate antimicrobials for empirical treatment for urinary tract infections with the absence of culture and sensitivity setting. Increasing antibiotic resistance trends indicate that it is imperative to rationalize the use of antimicrobials in the community and use these conservatively.