UNLABELLED: Bacteriophage-encoded endolysins are highly diverse enzymes that cleave the bacterial peptidoglycan layer. Current research focuses on their potential applications in medicine, in food conservation, and as biotechnological tools. Despite the wealth of applications relying on the use of endolysin, little is known about the enzymatic properties of these enzymes, especially in the case of endolysins of bacteriophages infecting Gram-negative species. Automated genome annotations therefore remain to be confirmed. Here, we report the biochemical analysis and cleavage site determination of a novel Salmonella bacteriophage endolysin, Gp110, which comprises an uncharacterized domain of unknown function (DUF3380; pfam11860) in its C terminus and shows a higher specific activity (34,240 U/muM) than that of 14 previously characterized endolysins active against peptidoglycan from Gram-negative bacteria (corresponding to 1.7- to 364-fold higher activity). Gp110 is a modular endolysin with an optimal pH of enzymatic activity of pH 8 and elevated thermal resistance. Reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) analysis coupled to mass spectrometry showed that DUF3380 has N-acetylmuramidase (lysozyme) activity cleaving the beta-(1,4) glycosidic bond between N-acetylmuramic acid and N-acetylglucosamine residues. Gp110 is active against directly cross-linked peptidoglycans with various peptide stem compositions, making it an attractive enzyme for developing novel antimicrobial agents. IMPORTANCE: We report the functional and biochemical characterization of the Salmonella phage endolysin Gp110. This endolysin has a modular structure with an enzymatically active domain and a cell wall binding domain. The enzymatic activity of this endolysin exceeds that of all other endolysins previously characterized using the same methods. A domain of unknown function (DUF3380) is responsible for this high enzymatic activity. We report that DUF3380 has N-acetylmuramidase activity against directly cross-linked peptidoglycans with various peptide stem compositions. This experimentally verified activity allows better classification and understanding of the enzymatic activities of endolysins, which mostly are inferred by sequence similarities. Three-dimensional structure predictions for Gp110 suggest a fold that is completely different from that of known structures of enzymes with the same peptidoglycan cleavage specificity, making this endolysin quite unique. All of these features, combined with increased thermal resistance, make Gp110 an attractive candidate for engineering novel endolysin-based antibacterials.