UNLABELLED: Salmonella is recognized as one of the most significant enteric foodborne bacterial pathogens. In recent years, the resistance of pathogens to biocides and other environmental stresses, especially when they are embedded in biofilm structures, has led to the search for and development of novel antimicrobial strategies capable of displaying both high efficiency and safety. In this direction, the aims of the present work were to evaluate the antimicrobial activity of hydrosol of the Mediterranean spice Thymbra capitata against both planktonic and biofilm cells of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and to compare its action with that of benzalkonium chloride (BC), a commonly used industrial biocide. In order to achieve this, the disinfectant activity following 6-min treatments was comparatively evaluated for both disinfectants by calculating the concentrations needed to achieve the same log reductions against both types of cells. Their bactericidal effect against biofilm cells was also comparatively determined by in situ and real-time visualization of cell inactivation through the use of time-lapse confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). Interestingly, results revealed that hydrosol was almost equally effective against biofilms and planktonic cells, whereas a 200-times-higher concentration of BC was needed to achieve the same effect against biofilm compared to planktonic cells. Similarly, time-lapse CLSM revealed the significant advantage of the hydrosol to easily penetrate within the biofilm structure and quickly kill the cells, despite the three-dimensional (3D) structure of Salmonella biofilm. IMPORTANCE: The results of this paper highlight the significant antimicrobial action of a natural compound, hydrosol of Thymbra capitata, against both planktonic and biofilm cells of a common foodborne pathogen. Hydrosol has numerous advantages as a disinfectant of food-contact surfaces. It is an aqueous solution which can easily be rinsed out from surfaces, it does not have the strong smell of the essential oil (EO) and it is a byproduct of the EO distillation procedure without any industrial application until now. Consequently, hydrosol obviously could be of great value to combat biofilms and thus to improve product safety not only for the food industries but probably also for many other industries which experience biofilm-related problems.