Iron is an important micronutrient, but it can also act as a dangerous element by interfering with glucose homeostasis and inflammation, two features that are already disturbed in obese subjects. In this work, we study the effects of systemic iron supplementation on metabolic and inflammatory responses in mice with hypoferremia induced by obesity to better characterize whether iron worsens the parameters that are already altered after 24 weeks of a high-fat diet (HFD). Mice were maintained on a control diet or a HFD for 24 weeks and received iron-III polymaltose (50 mg/kg/every 2 days) during the last two weeks. Glucose homeostasis (basal glucose and insulin test tolerance) and systemic and visceral adipose tissue (VAT) inflammation were assessed. Iron levels were measured in serum. The Prussian blue reaction was used in isolated macrophages to detect iron deposition. Iron supplementation resulted in an increased number of VAT macrophages that were positive for Prussian blue staining as well as increased serum iron levels. Systemic hepcidin, leptin, resistin, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) levels were not altered by iron supplementation. Local adipose tissue inflammation was also not made worse by iron supplementation because the levels of hepcidin, MCP-1, leptin, and interleukin (IL)-6 were not altered. In contrast, iron supplementation resulted in an increased production of IL-10 by adipose tissue and VAT macrophages. Leukocytosis and VAT plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) level were reduced, but insulin resistance was not altered after iron supplementation. In conclusion, systemic iron supplementation in mice with hypoferremia induced by obesity did not worsen inflammatory marker or adipose tissue inflammation or the metabolic status established by obesity. Iron deposition was observed in adipose tissue, mainly in macrophages, suggesting that these cells have mechanisms that promote iron incorporation without increasing the production of inflammatory mediators.