BACKGROUND: Infectious complications are a significant cause of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) failure, especially allogeneic HSCT (allo-HSCT) because of delayed immune reconstitution and graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) occurrence. Identifying the factors responsible for bacterial infections (BI) in patients undergoing HSCT will provide much more effective empirical antimicrobial treatment in this group of patients. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the epidemiology and profile of BI in patients after HSCT in 5 centers of the Polish Pediatric Group for Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in 2012-2013. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 308 HSCT recipients, we retrospectively analyzed 273 episodes of BI in 113 (36.7%) children aged 0.02-22 years (median age: 7 years), 92 after allo-HSCT and 22 after autologous HSCT (auto-HSCT). We assessed incidence of BI in different HSCT types by calculating the Index of Bacterial Infection (IBI) as a ratio of patients with at least 1 BI to all patients who underwent this type of HSCT in the analyzed period. We assessed the profile of BI with particular emphasis on multidrug-resistant organisms, and impact of underlying disease and of graft-versus-host disease on BI episodes. RESULTS: In the studied group, 273 episodes of BI were diagnosed, including 237 episodes after allo-HSCT and 36 after auto-HSCT. Among allo-HSCT recipients diagnosed with at least 1 BI, the IBI was 0.4 (matched sibling donor-HSCT 0.3; matched donor-HSCT 0.4; mismatched unrelated donor [MMUD]-HSCT 0.8; P = 0.027) and after auto-HSCT 0.3 per 1 transplanted patient. In patient after allo-HSCT because of myelo- or lymphoproliferative diseases and bone marrow failures, the major cause of infections was Enterobacteriaceae, while gram-positive bacteria predominated in the group with primary immunodeficiencies. In all patients after auto-HSCT, the dominant pathogen of BI were Enterobacteriaceae (P = 0.011). Time from each type of HSCT to infection caused by different pathogens did not differ significantly. CONCLUSIONS: The risk of BI does not depend on the underlying disease, but only on HSCT donor type and is the highest after MMUD-HSCT procedure. The profile of BI depends on the underlying disease and HSCT donor type, but does not depend on the occurrence of acute GVHD. Gram-negative bacteria predominated in patients with myelo- and lymphoproliferative diseases, while in patients with primary immunodeficiencies gram-positive strains were predominant.