BACKGROUND: Biliary tract cancers (BTCs) are uncommon and are associated with a dismal prognosis. Combinations of gemcitabine and platinum chemotherapy (gemcitabine and platinum-based therapy [GP]) form the standard approach for treating advanced BTC. To characterize the spectrum of mutations and to identify potential biomarkers for a GP response in BTC, this study evaluated the genomic landscape and assessed whether mutations affecting DNA repair were associated with GP resistance. METHODS: Pretreatment, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples from 183 BTC patients treated with GP were analyzed. Cox regression models were used to determine the association between mutations, progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS). RESULTS: When genes with an incidence > 10% were considered, no individual gene was independently predictive of a GP response. In patients with unresectable BTC who received GP as their first-line therapy, the joint status of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A), tumor protein 53 (TP53), and AT-rich interaction domain 1A (ARID1A) was associated with PFS (P = .0004) and OS (P </= .0001). Patients with mutations in CDKN2A and TP53 were identified as a poor-prognosis cohort with a median PFS of 2.63 months and a median OS of 5.22 months. Patients with mutant ARID1A, regardless of the single-mutation status of TP53 or CDKN2A, had similar outcomes. A patient who exhibited mutations in all 3 genes had a median PFS of 20.37 months, and OS was not reached. CONCLUSIONS: In the largest exploratory analysis of this kind for BTC, 3 prevalent, mutually exclusive mutations represent distinct patient cohorts. These mutations are prognostic and may represent a predictive biomarker for a GP response. Prospective studies to validate these findings are needed, and they should include the incorporation of therapies that exploit the genomic instability observed with these mutations in BTC. Cancer 2016;122:3657-66. (c) 2016 American Cancer Society.