INTRODUCTION: Elimination of microorganisms from infected root canals is a complicated task. Numerous measures have been described to reduce the microbial load in the root canal system, including the use of various instrumentation techniques, irrigation regimens and intracanal medicaments. The drawbacks of few commonly used irrigants include toxic and harmful side effects, microbial resistance to antimicrobial agents and staining. Hence there is a need for alternative agents which are nontoxic, effective and safe. AIM: To compare and evaluate antimicrobial effects of 2% Chlorhexidine (CHX) versus 0.1% Octenidine Dihydrochloride (OCT) as root canal irrigant with and without passive ultrasonic irrigation against Enterococcus faecalis (E. faecalis) in vitro and to evaluate the depth of penetration of irrigant solution into the dentinal tubules at the junction of middle and apical third. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty eight freshly extracted, single rooted human mandibular premolars were decoronated and root specimen standardized to 14mm. Biofilm of E. faecalis (strain ATCC 29212) was grown for seven days and the specimens were divided into four groups (n=12) based on irrigation protocol : Group I- Conventional Syringe Irrigation (CSI) with 2% CHX, Group II- CSI + 0.1% OCT, Group III-Passive Ultrasonic Irrigation (PUI) + 2% CHX and Group IV- PUI+ 0.1% OCT. Dentin shavings were collected at two depths (200mum and 400mum) and total number of colony forming units were determined. The data were statistically analyzed using ANOVA, Scheffes multiple comparison of means and paired t-test (p<0.05). RESULTS: Group III and IV (PUI) showed significant difference compared to Group I and II (CSI) both at 200mum and 400mum (p=0.000). For Group III and Group IV no significant differences were found at 200mum and 400mum (p=1.000 and 0.363 respectively), however significant difference was found between data at 200mum and 400mum for all the four groups (p=0.000). CONCLUSION: Octenidine (0.1%) was more effective than 2% Chlorhexidine against E. faecalis both at 200mum and 400mum. Passive ultrasonic irrigation proved to enhance the antimicrobial action of the irrigants.