Carbohydrate-protein interactions occur through glycoproteins, glycolipids, or polysaccharides displayed on the cell surface with lectins. However, studying these interactions is challenging because of the complexity and heterogeneity of the cell surface, the inherent structural complexity of carbohydrates, and the typically weak affinities of the binding reactions between the lectins and monovalent carbohydrates. The lack of chromophores and fluorophores in carbohydrate structures often drives such investigations toward fluorescence labeling techniques, which usually require tedious and complex synthetic work to conjugate fluorescent tags with additional risk of altering the reaction dynamics. Probing these interactions directly on the cell surface is even more difficult since cells could be too fragile for labeling or labile dynamics could be affected by the labeled molecules that may interfere with the cellular activities, resulting in unwanted cell responses. In contrast, label-free biosensors allow real-time monitoring of carbohydrate-protein interactions in their natural states. A prerequisite, though, for this strategy to work is to mimic the coding information on potential interactions of cell surfaces onto different biosensing platforms, while the complementary binding process can be transduced into a useful signal noninvasively. Through carbohydrate self-assembled monolayers and glycopolymer scaffolds, the multivalency of the naturally existing simple and complex carbohydrates can be mimicked and exploited with label-free readouts (e.g., optical, acoustic, mechanical, electrochemical, and electrical sensors), yet such inquiries reflect only limited aspects of complicated biointeraction processes due to the unimodal transduction. In this Account, we illustrate that functionalized glycosylated conductive polymer scaffolds are the ideal multimodal biointerfaces that not only simplify the immobilization process for surface fabrication via electrochemical polymerization but also enable the simultaneous analysis of the binding events with orthogonal electrical, optical, or mass sensing label-free readouts. We established this approach using polyaniline and polythiophene as examples. Two general methods were demonstrated for glycosylated polymer fabrications (i.e., electropolymerization of monomer bearing alpha-mannoside residues or click chemistry based mannose conjugation to electrochemically preformed quinone fused polymer with potential to introduce different carbohydrate moieties and construct glycan arrays in a similar manner). Their conjugated pi system extending over a large number of recurrent monomer units renders them sensitive optoelectronic materials. The carbohydrate-protein interactions on the side chain could disrupt the electrostatic, H-bonding, steric, or van der Waals interactions within or between polymers, leading to a change of conductivity or optical absorption of the conductive polymers. This will allow concurrent interrogation of these interactions with adjoining biological processes and mechanisms in multimodal fashion. Furthermore, the functionalized glycosylated conductive polymers can be designed and synthesized with controlled oxidation states, desired ionic dopants, and the imperative density and orientation of the sugar ligands that enable the assessment of differential receptor binding profiles of carbohydrate-protein interactions with much more detailed information and high accuracy. Finally, the glycosylated biosensing interfaces were successfully validated for their applications in Gram-negative bacterial detection, antibiotic resistance studies, and antimicrobial susceptibility assays, all based on inferring carbohydrate-protein interactions directly on cell surfaces, thus illustrating their potential uses in infectious disease research, clinical diagnostics, and environmental monitoring of harmful pathogens.