INTRODUCTION: Urinary tract infection (UTI) affects 10% of girls and 3% of boys by age 16. Both the American Academy of Pediatrics and National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence Guidelines recommend urine testing prior to initiation of antibiotic treatment and the use of local antibiograms to guide empiric antibiotic therapy. Urine culture results not only provide the opportunity to halt empiric therapy if there is no bacterial growth, but also allow for tailoring of broad-spectrum therapy. Additionally, the use of antiobiograms improves empiric antibiotic selection based on local resistance patterns. However, execution of guideline recommendations has proved challenging. Understanding barriers in implementation is critical to developing targeted interventions aimed to improve adherence to these guidelines. OBJECTIVES: The present study sought to investigate practice patterns and factors that influence urine testing and antibiogram use in the setting of empiric antibiotic treatment of UTI in children to ultimately improve adherence to UTI management guidelines. STUDY DESIGN: A random, national sample of physicians caring for children was surveyed from the American Medical Association Masterfile. Participants were queried regarding practice type, length of time in practice, factors influencing urine testing, urine specimen collection method, and antibiogram utilization. Logistic regression was used to assess factors associated with use of urine testing, bagged specimens, and antibiograms. RESULTS: Of respondents who acknowledged contact by surveyors, 47% completed the survey (n = 366). Most respondents (84%) obtain urinalysis and culture prior to treatment for UTI. Physicians report they would more likely order testing if the specimen were easier to collect (46%) and if results were available immediately (48%) (Table). Urine collection by bag was more common in circumcised boys (>30%) compared with girls (20%) and uncircumcised boys (20%) (P = 0.02). The most common reasons for collection by bag were parental refusal for (49%) and difficulty with (42%) catheterization (Table). Of the 70% of respondents reporting antibiogram access (n = 256), 50% report its use the majority of the time with empiric prescription (n = 128). DISCUSSION: While most practitioners report following guidelines to obtain urine testing prior to antibiotic prescription for UTI, urine collection by bag is common. Additionally, <50% of practitioners adhere to guideline recommendations for empiric antibiotic selection based on local antibiograms. Interventions to improve adherence to UTI management guidelines should focus on (1) improving catheterization practices, (2) educating parents regarding the value of catheterization, and (3) incorporating local antibiograms into electronic medical records.