The objectives of this study were to characterize Staphylococcus aureus isolated from artisanal and industrialized Minas frescal cheeses, to determine their antimicrobial susceptibility profile as well as the genetic similarity among the isolates. The isolates were also tested for staphylococcal enterotoxin genes and other virulence factors. Fifty-six artisanal raw milk cheeses sold at street fairs and 10 industrialized cheeses commercialized in supermarkets of Goiania, Goias, were analyzed. Staphylococcus aureus was confirmed in 19 samples (33.9%) of artisanal cheese by detection of femA gene, in which 29 isolates were obtained. These isolates were submitted to the antimicrobial susceptibility test and classified into 9 different profiles (A-I). Thirteen isolates (44.8) were resistant to penicillin and 3 (10.3) to tetracycline, with 2 (7.4) resistant to both. The multiplex PCR technique was performed to detect virulence genes that code for the production of hemolysins (Hla and Hlb), toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST-1), exfoliative toxins (ETa and ETb), and staphylococcal enterotoxins [SE; SEA-SEE, SEG-SEJ, SEM-SEO]. All the isolates amplified for the hla gene and 14 (48.3%) for the hlb gene. The seh gene was the most frequently detected (n=11, 37.9%), followed by seo gene (n=3; 10.3%). In one isolate (3.4%), 4 enterotoxins genes were detected, and in another, 6 (3.4%) were detected. The comparison performed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of the 29 isolates revealed 18 genotypic profiles, which were grouped into 5 clusters. The genotyping found high genetic similarity among the isolates. Identical isolates were obtained from different samples and one sample showed more than one genetically different isolate. The high prevalence of S. aureus in the Minas Frescal cheese samples, as well as the detection of toxin encoding genes identified in this study, warns of the necessity to reduce the contamination levels in this type of cheese through monitoring and controlling the production and trade of the product.