Magnesium (Mg) has recently received increasing attention due to its unique biological performance, including cytocompatibility, antibacterial and biodegradable properties. However, rapid corrosion in physiological environment and potential toxicity limits its clinical applications. To improve the corrosion resistance meanwhile not compromise other excellent performance, self-assembled colloidal particles were deposited onto magnesium surfaces in ethanol by a simple and effective electrophoretic deposition (EPD) method. The fabricated functional nanostructured coatings were investigated using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The electrochemical test, pH value, and Mg ion concentration data show that the corrosion resistance of Mg samples is enhanced appreciably after surface treatment. In vitro cellular response and antibacterial capability of the modified Mg substrates are performed. Significantly increased cell adhesion and viability are observed from the coated Mg samples, and the amounts of adherent bacteria on the treated Mg surfaces diminish remarkably compared to the bare Mg. Furthermore, the bare and coated Mg samples were implanted in New Zealand white rabbits for 12 weeks to examine the in vivo long-term corrosion performance and in situ inflammation behavior. The experiment results confirmed that compared with bare Mg substrate the corrosion and foreign-body reactions of the coated Mg samples were suppressed. The above results suggested that our coatings, which effectively enhance the biocompatibility, antimicrobial properties, and corrosion resistance of Mg substrate, provide a simple and practical strategy to expedite clinical acceptance of biodegradableMg and its alloys. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Biomedical Mg metals have been considered as promising biodegradable implants because of their intended functions, such as cytocompatibility, antibacterial, and biodegradable properties. However, rapid corrosion in physiological environment limits their clinical applications. Alloying and surface coatings have been used to reduce the degradation rate. But this would compromise other excellent performance of Mg samples, including antibacterial and anti-inflammatory activity. Thus, while the rapid degradation of Mg samples must be solved, good antibacterial property and acceptable cytocompatibility are also necessary. In this study, polymer-based coatings were fabricated on Mg surfaces by electrophoretic deposition of poly(isobornyl acrylate-co-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate)/tannic acid (P(ISA-co-DMA)/TA) colloidal particles. It suggested that the coating materials effectively improved the biocompatibility, antimicrobial behavior, and corrosion resistance of biomedical Mg.