Comprehensive data on drug-resistant patterns of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates in developing countries is limited. We conducted a multihospital study to assess the rate and trend of drug-resistant phenotypes in Ac. baumannii using standardized definitions and to determine the remaining therapeutic options against resistant phenotypes. The 401 nonduplicate isolates were collected from six hospitals which are geographically distributed across Tehran, Iran over a 3-year period. Following PCR of blaOXA-51-like gene, susceptibility testing was performed against nine antimicrobial agent categories. Three hundred and ninety (97%) isolates were resistant to least two carbapenems; carbapenem-resistant Ac. baumannii. The majority of isolates (366, 91.3%) were extensively drug resistant (XDR) and the rest of the isolates were classified as multidrug resistant (26, 6.8%) and susceptible (9, 2.2%). The rate of XDR-AB slightly decreased from 93.8% in 2011 to 89.8% in 2013. A considerable decrease in resistance to doxycycline, minocycline and tigecycline was demonstrated. The XDR-AB isolates showed susceptibility to gentamicin (10.4%), tobramycin (23%), ampicilin-sulbactam (30.1%), minocycline (32.8%), tigecycline (10.7%), doxycycline (21.6%), colistin (100%) and polymixin B (100%). We demonstrated the rising trend of resistance to all antibiotic categories except tetracyclines and folate pathway inhibitors. We found that the treatment options against XDR-AB are extremely limited and each treatment alternative including even old, but safe, antibiotics might be considered. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The high frequency of drug-resistant phenotypes including carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii, multidrug-resistant, and extensively resistant has been demonstrated in Ac. baumannii isolates tested here. As the antibiotic resistance pattern of isolates varies in different geographical regions, this study can provide comprehensive information about the antibiotic resistance profile of Ac. baumannii isolates in Tehran. In addition, the resistance profiles could be effectively considered by clinicians to manage antibiotic therapy. This work also emphasizes on the prudent use of antibiotics and the monitoring of antibiotic susceptibility trend and rate.