Baicalin, extracted and purified from the Chinese medicinal plant, Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi (Huang qin in Chinese), exhibits potent anti-inflammatory activity against asthma. However, it remains unknown whether baicalin inhibits the activity of CC chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) and its ligands, which are crucial for the initiation of airway inflammation. In the present study, we investigated the effects of baicalin on CCR7 and its ligands, CCL19 and CCL21, as well as on the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) pathway in a mouse model of asthma. A mouse model of acute asthma was established by exposing the mice to ovalbumin (OVA) (by intraperitoneal injection and inhalational challenge). Within 24 h of the final OVA challenge, lung function was detected by direct airway resistance analysis. Lung tissues were examined for pathological changes. Inflammatory cell counts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were assessed. ELISA was utilized to evaluate the OVA-IgE, CCL19 and CCL21 levels in BALF. The interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha levels in serum were also detected by ELISA. The protein expression levels of CCR7, as well as that of phosphorylated IkappaBalpha (p-IkappaBalpha) and phosphorylated p65 (p-p65) were determined by western blot analysis and RT-qPCR was used to determine the CCR7 mRNA levels. Our data demonstrated that the oral administration of baicalin significantly improved pulmonary function and attenuated inflammatory cell infiltration into the lungs. Baicalin also decreased the levels of OVA-IgE, IL-6, TNF-alpha and CCR7, as well as those of its ligand, CCL19; the levels of NF-kappaB were also markedly suppressed by baicalin. The CCR7 mRNA level was substantially decreased. Our results thus suggest that baicalin exerts an inhibitory effect on airway inflammation, and this effect may be associated with the inhibition of CCR7 and CCL19/CCL21, which may provide new mechanistic insight into the antiinflammatory effects of baicalin.