Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia accompanied by cholestasis is a frequent side effect during chronic treatment with the antimicrobial agent fusidic acid. Previous studies from our laboratory, addressing mechanisms of musculoskeletal toxicity arising from coadministration of fusidic acid with statins, demonstrated the ability of fusidic acid to potently inhibit human organic anion transporting polypeptides OATP1B1 (IC50 = 1.6 muM) and OATP1B3 (IC50 = 2.5 muM), which are responsible for the uptake-limited clearance of statins as well as bilirubin glucuronide conjugates. In the present work, inhibitory effects of fusidic acid were characterized against additional human hepatobiliary transporters [Na(+)/taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP), bile salt export pump (BSEP), and multidrug resistance-associated proteins MRP2 and MRP3] as well as uridine glucuronosyl transferase (UGT1A1), which mediate the disposition of bile acids and bilirubin (and its conjugated metabolites). Fusidic acid demonstrated concentration-dependent inhibition of human NTCP- and BSEP-mediated taurocholic acid transport with IC50 values of 44 and 3.8 muM, respectively. Inhibition of BSEP activity by fusidic acid was also consistent with the potent disruption of cellular biliary flux (AC50 = 11 muM) in the hepatocyte imaging assay technology assay, with minimal impact on other toxicity end points (e.g., cytotoxicity, mitochondrial membrane potential, reactive oxygen species generation, glutathione depletion, etc.). Fusidic acid also inhibited UGT1A1-catalyzed beta-estradiol glucuronidation activity in human liver microsomes with an IC50 value of 16 muM. Fusidic acid did not demonstrate any significant inhibition of ATP-dependent LTC4 transport (IC50's > 300 muM) in human MRP2 or MRP3 vesicles. R values, which reflect maximal in vivo inhibition, were estimated from a static mathematical model by taking into consideration the IC50 values generated in the various in vitro assays and clinically efficacious unbound fusidic acid concentrations. The magnitudes of in vivo interaction (R values) resulting from the inhibition of OATP1B1, UGT1A1, NTCP, and BSEP transport were approximately 1.9-2.6, 1.1-1.2, 1.0-1.1, and 1.4-1.7, respectively, which are indicative of some degree of inherent toxicity risk, particularly via inhibition of OATP and BSEP. Collectively, these observations indicate that inhibition of human BSEP by fusidic acid could affect bile acid homeostasis, resulting in cholestatic hepatotoxicity in the clinic. Lack of direct inhibitory effects on MRP2 transport by fusidic acid suggests that conjugated hyperbilirubinemia does not arise via interference in MRP2-mediated biliary disposition of bilirubin glucuronides. Instead, it is possible that elevation in the level of bilirubin conjugates in blood is mediated through inhibition of hepatic OATPs, which are responsible for their reuptake and/or downregulation of MRP2 transporter as a consequence of cholestatic injury.