OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the outcome of patients treated with second-line chemotherapy for methotrexate-resistant low-risk GTN at the Sheffield Centre, UK between 2001 and 2015, including the novel use of single-agent carboplatin as a strategy to reduce exposure to combination chemotherapy. METHODS: 392 low-risk GTN patients were treated with first-line methotrexate. The selection of chemotherapy regimen following methotrexate-resistance depended on the volume of residual disease as indicated by the serum hCG value at the time, with patients switching to either single-agent dactinomycin at an hCG level<150IU/L from 2001-2010 and <300IU/L since 2010, or to combination treatment with etoposide/dactinomycin (EA) above these thresholds. In order to reduce exposure to more toxic combination chemotherapy regimens, our treatment policy was revised in 2011, with the recommendation of single-agent carboplatin as an alternative to EA at hCG levels >300IU/L. RESULTS: 136 (35%) of 392 received second-line chemotherapy following methotrexate-resistance. 59 patients received single-agent dactinomycin with 53 (90%) patients achieving complete hCG response, 3 patients requiring combination chemotherapy or surgery, and 3 patients subsequently spontaneously resolving. 56 patients received EA chemotherapy with hCG complete response in 50 (89%) patients, and the remaining 6 patients were cured with further multi-agent chemotherapy or surgery. With carboplatin, 17/21 (81%) achieved an overall complete hCG response rate, with 4 patients requiring third-line EA. Carboplatin was well tolerated with no significant alopecia; myelosuppression was the most significant toxicity. Overall survival for all patients was 100%. CONCLUSION: These data show the continued excellent outcomes for methotrexate-resistant low-risk patients treated with single-agent dactinomycin or EA. Our experience with carboplatin is promising and provides an alternative regimen for methotrexate-resistant low-risk disease that avoids alopecia and in-patient treatment.