BACKGROUND: Recently, the emergence of multidrug-resistant organisms such as extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Enterobacteriaceae has raised considerable concern regarding the appropriate treatment of intra-abdominal infections (IAIs). In this study, we investigated the molecular characteristics of ESBL among clinical isolates of Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae causing IAIs and their pattern of antimicrobial resistance, which can provide useful information about the epidemiology and risk factors associated with these infections. MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred sixty-seven E.coli and 47 K. pneumoniae ESBL-producing strains causing IAIs were collected from 9 hospitals in China, during 2012 and 2013. The antimicrobial susceptibility profile of these strains was determined. Polymerase chain reaction and sequencing were performed to identify genes for beta-lactamase (blaTEM, blaSHV, blaOXA-1-like, and blaCTX-M). The isolates were also analyzed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). RESULTS: In 167 ESBL-producing E. coli strains, 104 strains (62.3%) were positive for CTX-M, and 9 strains (5.39%) were positive for SHV. Among the 47 K. pneumoniae strains, 35 strains (74.5%) were positive for SHV-2a, 12 strains (25.5%) were positive for CTX-M. No TEM-type and OXA-1-like strain was detected among all the ESBL-producing strains. Regarding the CTX-M-positive E. coli and K. pneumoniae strains, CTX-M-15 was the most common genotype in E. coli and K. pneumoniae strains, accounting for 28.7% and 17.0%, respectively, followed by CTX-M-55 accounting for 16.2% and 2.13%, respectively; the remaining genotypes included CTX-M-123 and CTX-M-82. PFGE showed that E.coli and K. pneumoniae ESBL-producing strains causing IAIs were diverse and that emerging resistance may not be due to the dissemination of national clones. CONCLUSION: The present study revealed that in ESBL-producing strains causing IAIs in China, the most common genotype for E.coli was CTX-M-15 and for K. pneumoniae was SHV-2a. However, there was a wide diversity of strains causing IAIs among the ESBL-producing E. coli and K. pneumoniae.