OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) on autophagy and chemotherapy resistance in human leukemiacell line (K562) cells, and to explore the underlying mechanisms. Methods: The K562 cells were cultured in vitro and divided into 6 groups: a chemotherapeutic group, a chemotherapeutic control group, a HMGB1 preconditioning group, a HMGB1 preconditioning control group, a HMGB1 siRNA group and a siRNA control group. The chemotherapeutic group was further divided into a vincristine (VCR) group, an etoposide (VP-16) group, a cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C) group, a adriamycin (ADM) group and a arsenic trioxide (As2O3) group. The cell activity was evaluated by cell counting kit-8. The protein levels of HMGB1, microtubule-associate protein1light chain3 (LC3), AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and mammalian target of rapamycin (m-TOR) were determined by Western blotting. The level of serum HMGB1 was evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The autophagy was examined by monodansylcadaverine staining and observed under transmission electron microscopy. Results: Compared with the control group, the cell activity was significantly decreased and the level of serum HMGB1 was significantly increased in the chemotherapeutic (VCR, VP-16, Ara-C, ADM and As2O3) groups (all P<0.05). Compared with the control group, the cell activity and the level of serum HMGB1 were significantly increased in the HMGB1 preconditioning group (both P<0.05). Compared with the siRNA control group, the cell activity and the level of serum HMGB1 were significantly decreased in the HMGB1 siRNA group (both P<0.05). Compared with the control group, the expression of LC3-II and the formation of autophagic bodies were increased in the HMGB1 preconditioning group (both P<0.05), the p-AMPK expression was increased and p-mTOR expression was decreased (both P<0.05). Conclusion: HMGB1 can increase the autophagy and promote chemotherapy resistance through the pathway of AMPK/m-TOR in K562 cells.