Rhodotorula species are opportunistic pathogens, which cause not only systemic fungaemia but also other localized infections. Despite serious side effects such as nephrotoxicity and hypokalemia, amphotericin B (a polyene antifungal) has been commonly prescribed for Rhodotorula infection because Rhodotorula species are resistant against a candin family of antifungal agents. In this study, novel active compounds against Rhodotorula species were screened from the extracts of entomopathogenic fungi based on the synergistic effect of polyene nystatin (NYS), which causes efficient targeting of compounds due to increased permeability through the fungal cell membrane. Around 37% of culture extracts from 31 entomopathogenic fungal strains showed anti-Rhodotorula activity in the synergistic bioassay system, suggesting that the coexistence assay with NYS enhanced the discovery of anti-Rhodotorula compounds. Judging from various physicochemical data, the active component from strain HF763 was identified as an immunosuppressant drug, mycophenolic acid (MPA). The minimum inhibitory concentration of MPA against three pathogenic Rhodotorula strains was determined, focusing on the synergistic effect with NYS. The results revealed that the values decreased by at least 87% in the presence of NYS, indicating that MPA showed a synergistic effect with NYS. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study aimed to screen active compounds against Rhodotorula species that are resistant to a candin family of antifungal agents, from entomopathogenic fungi. Assuming that most of the latent antifungal compounds do not exert their activity due to their inability to penetrate the membrane, we took advantage of polyene nystatin in the screening to increase permeability through the fungal cell membrane. The result of the screening revealed hidden antifungal activity of mycophenolic acid, demonstrating that the method applied in this study unlocks the potentials of bioresources, and proposes a new remedy for mycosis.