An 8-week feeding trial was conducted to evaluate the effects of dietary probiotics on growth performance and non-specific immune responses in starry flounder, Platichthys stellatus. Fish averaging 46.5 +/- 0.65 g (mean +/- SD) were fed one of the six experimental diets; one control (Cont), and five other diets were prepared by supplementing single-probiotics 1 (Bacillus subtilis; SP1, 2 x 10(9) CFU kg(-1) diet), single-probiotics 2 (Bacillus licheniformis; SP2, 2 x 10(9) CFU kg(-1) diet), multi-probiotics 1 (Bacillus subtilis + Bacillus licheniformis; MP1, 2 x 10(9) CFU kg(-1) diet), multi-probiotics 2 (commercial probiotics; Bacillus subtills + Bacillus licheniformis + Paenibacillus polymyxa + Aspergillus oryzae + Saccharomyces cerevisiae; MP2, 2 x 10(9) CFU kg(-1) diet) and oxytetracycline (OTC) at 5 g OTC kg(-1) diet. At the end of 8 weeks feeding trial, weight gain (WG) and specific growth rate (SGR) of fish fed SP1, MP1 and MP2 diets were significantly higher than those of fish fed control diet (P < 0.05). Superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity of fish fed MP2 diet was significantly higher than those of fish fed OTC diet (P < 0.05). Nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) activity and lysozyme activity of fish fed SP1, MP1 and MP2 diets were significantly higher than those of fish fed OTC diet (P < 0.05). However, there was no significant difference among fish fed SP1, SP2, MP1 and MP2 diets. During the Edwardsiella tarda challenge test, the first mortality occurred on day 2. After the 14 days challenge test, cumulative survival rate of fish fed MP1 and MP2 diets were significantly higher than those of fish fed control diet (P < 0.05). However, there was no significant difference among fish fed SP1, SP2, MP1, MP2 and OTC diets in survival rate at the termination of the challenge test. Although there was little advantage in immunological parameters with fish fed MP diets, single and multi-probiotics were equally effective statistically. These results demonstrated that single or multi-probiotics had equal beneficial effect as an antibiotic replacer in terms of growth performance, non-specific immune responses and disease resistance in starry flounder.