Background:: The mechanism underlying the vascular dysfunction induced by ethanol is not totally understood. Identification of biochemical/molecular mechanisms that could explain such effects is warranted. Objective:: To investigate whether acute ethanol intake activates the vascular RhoA/Rho kinase pathway in resistance arteries and the role of NAD(P)H oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS) on such response. We also evaluated the requirement of p47phox translocation for ethanol-induced NAD(P)H oxidase activation. Methods:: Male Wistar rats were orally treated with ethanol (1g/kg, p.o. gavage) or water (control). Some rats were treated with vitamin C (250 mg/kg, p.o. gavage, 5 days) before administration of water or ethanol. The mesenteric arterial bed (MAB) was collected 30 min after ethanol administration. Results:: Vitamin C prevented ethanol-induced increase in superoxide anion (O2-) generation and lipoperoxidation in the MAB. Catalase and superoxide dismutase activities and the reduced glutathione, nitrate and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) levels were not affected by ethanol. Vitamin C and 4-methylpyrazole prevented the increase on O2- generation induced by ethanol in cultured MAB vascular smooth muscle cells. Ethanol had no effect on phosphorylation levels of protein kinase B (Akt) and eNOS (Ser1177 or Thr495 residues) or MAB vascular reactivity. Vitamin C prevented ethanol-induced increase in the membrane: cytosol fraction ratio of p47phox and RhoA expression in the rat MAB. Conclusion:: Acute ethanol intake induces activation of the RhoA/Rho kinase pathway by a mechanism that involves ROS generation. In resistance arteries, ethanol activates NAD(P)H oxidase by inducing p47phox translocation by a redox-sensitive mechanism. Fundamento:: O mecanismo da disfuncao vascular induzido pelo consumo de etanol nao e totalmente compreendido. Justifica-se, assim a identificacao de mecanismos bioquimicos e moleculares que poderiam explicar tais efeitos. Objetivos:: Investigar se a ingestao aguda de etanol ativa a via vascular RhoA/Rho quinase em arterias de resistencia e o papel das especies reativas de oxigenio (ERO) derivadas da NAD(P)H oxidase nessa resposta. Nos tambem avaliamos se ocorreu translocacao da p47phox e ativacao da NAD(P)H oxidase apos o consumo agudo de etanol. Metodos:: Ratos Wistar machos foram tratados com etanol via oral (1g/kg, p.o. gavagem) ou agua (controle). Alguns ratos foram tratados com vitamina C (250 mg/kg, p.o. gavagem, 5 dias) antes de agua ou etanol. O leito arterial mesenterico (LAM) foi coleado 30 min apos a administracao de etanol. Resultados:: A vitamina C preveniu o aumento da geracao de anion superoxido (O2 -) e lipoperoxidacao no LAM induzidos pelo etanol. A atividade da catalase (CAT), da superoxido dismutase (SOD) e os niveis de glutationa reduzida(GSH), nitrato e peroxido de hidrogenio (H2O2) nao foram afetados apos a ingestao aguda de etanol. A vitamina C e o 4-metilpirazol preveniram o aumento na geracao de O2 - induzido pelo etanol em cultura de celulas do musculo liso vascular (CMLV). O etanol nao afetou a fosforilacao da proteina quinase B (Akt) e nem da oxido nitrico sintase endotelial (eNOS) (nos residuos de Ser1177 ou Thr495) ou a reatividade vascular do LAM. A vitamina C preveniu o aumento da razao membrana:citosol da p47phox e a expressao da RhoA no LAM de rato induzido pelo etanol. Conclusao:: A ingestao aguda de etanol induz a ativacao da via RhoA/Rho quinase por um mecanismo que envolve a geracao de ERO. Nas arterias de resistencia, o etanol ativa NAD(P)H oxidase induzindo a translocacao da p47phox por um mecanismo redox-sensivel.