Some life-threatening, foodborne, and zoonotic infections are transmitted through poultry birds. Inappropriate and indiscriminate use of antimicrobials in the livestock industry has led to an increased prevalence of multidrug-resistant bacteria with epidemic potential. Here, we present a functional molecular epidemiological analysis entailing the phenotypic and whole-genome sequence-based characterization of 11 H. pullorum isolates from broiler and free-range chickens sampled from retail wet markets in Hyderabad City, India. Antimicrobial susceptibility tests revealed all of the isolates to be resistant to multiple antibiotic classes such as fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, sulfonamides, and macrolides. The isolates were also found to be extended-spectrum beta-lactamase producers and were even resistant to clavulanic acid. Whole-genome sequencing and comparative genomic analysis of these isolates revealed the presence of five or six well-characterized antimicrobial resistance genes, including those encoding a resistance-nodulation-division efflux pump(s). Phylogenetic analysis combined with pan-genome analysis revealed a remarkable degree of genetic diversity among the isolates from free-range chickens; in contrast, a high degree of genetic similarity was observed among broiler chicken isolates. Comparative genomic analysis of all publicly available H. pullorum genomes, including our isolates (n = 16), together with the genomes of 17 other Helicobacter species, revealed a high number (8,560) of H. pullorum-specific protein-encoding genes, with an average of 535 such genes per isolate. In silico virulence screening identified 182 important virulence genes and also revealed high strain-specific gene content in isolates from free-range chickens (average, 34) compared to broiler chicken isolates. A significant prevalence of prophages (ranging from 1 to 9) and a significant presence of genomic islands (0 to 4) were observed in free-range and broiler chicken isolates. Taken together, these observations provide significant baseline data for functional molecular infection epidemiology of nonpyloric Helicobacter species such as H. pullorum by unraveling their evolution in chickens and their possible zoonotic transmission to humans. IMPORTANCE: Globally, the poultry industry is expanding with an ever-growing consumer base for chicken meat. Given this, food-associated transmission of multidrug-resistant bacteria represents an important health care issue. Our study involves a critical baseline approach directed at genome sequence-based epidemiology and transmission dynamics of H. pullorum, a poultry pathogen having established zoonotic potential. We believe our studies would facilitate the development of surveillance systems that ensure the safety of food for humans and guide public health policies related to the use of antibiotics in animal feed in countries such as India. We sequenced 11 new genomes of H. pullorum as a part of this study. These genomes would provide much value in addition to the ongoing comparative genomic studies of helicobacters.