INTRODUCTION: Candida albicans is the most prevalent fungal pathogen in humans. Due to the development of drug resistance, there is today a need for new antifungal agents for the efficient management of C. albicans infections. Therefore, we reviewed antifungal activity, mechanisms of action, possible synergism with antifungal drugs of all natural substances experimented to be efficient against C. albicans for future. METHODS: An extensive and systematic review of the literature was undertaken and all relevant abstracts and full-text articles analyzed and included in the review. REVIEW: A total of 111 documents were published and highlighted 142 anti-C. albicans natural products. These products are mostly are reported in Asia (44.37%) and America (28.17%). According to in vitro model criteria, from the 142 natural substances, antifungal activity can be considered as important for 40 (28.20%) and moderate for 24 (16.90%). Sixteen products have their antifungal activity confirmed by in vivo gold standard experimentation. Microbial natural products, source of antifungals, have their antifungal mechanism well described in the literature: interaction with ergosterol (polyenes), inhibition 1,3-beta-d-glucan synthase (Echinocandins), inhibition of the synthesis of cell wall components (chitin and mannoproteins), inhibition of sphingolipid synthesis (serine palmitoyltransferase, ceramide synthase, inositol phosphoceramide synthase) and inhibition of protein synthesis (sordarins). Natural products from plants mostly exert their antifungal effects by membrane-active mechanism. Some substances from arthropods are also explored to act on the fungal membrane. Interestingly, synergistic effects were found between different classes of natural products as well as between natural products and azoles. CONCLUSION: Search for anti-C. albicans new drugs is promising since the list of natural substances, which disclose activity against this yeast is today long. Investigations must be pursued not only to found more new anti-Candida compounds from plants and organisms but also to carried out details on molecules from already known anti-Candida compounds and to more elucidate mechanisms of action.