The anthelmintic activity of column fractioned Dicranopteris linearis (Burm.f.) Underw. extracts was used for in vitro incubation study against adult Gastrothylax crumenifer. The qualitative analysis showed ethanol extract performed well to express 12 secondary metabolites studied except anthocyanin. Quantitative phytochemical analysis of terpenoids, phenols, flavonoids and tannins showed predominant amount of terpenoids (97.0+/-1.15)mg/g and tannins (30.8+/-0.44)mg tannic acid equivalents/gram. GC-MS analysis of fraction separated under column (Fraction V-79.5%) showed presence of QUERCETIN 7,3',4' TRIMETHOXY, a flavonoids (polyphenol derivative), PHYTOL, a diterpenoids, feren-8-ene, a triterpenoids, hexdecanoic acid, a fatty acid derivative shown to have potent anthelmintic property. 25ml of Hedon-Fleig (H-F) salt solution containing various concentrations (1, 2, 3, 4 and 5mg/ml) respectively as test extracts, Standard control Oxyclozanide @1(*)% (0.25g/25ml) and negative control H-F salt solution, distributed to 7-Petri plates in an incubator with 5% CO2 at 37 degrees C. Twenty five amphistomes were incubated and the motility of control and drug treated flukes was observed under dissection microscope at a regular time interval of 0, 10, 15, 30min and 1hr respectively. The motility response of the parasites was categorized with specific score 3, 2, 1, 0 respectively. Relative Motility (RM) value based on mean mortality and drug concentration for analysis of Lethal Concentration (LC50) and were determined by Probit regression analysis. In vitro incubation study revealed death of all trematodes, lethal at 10min incubation time at 5mg/ml concentration, indicated RM value is 0, equivalent effective to Standard control Oxyclozanide, where RM value is 0 at 10min. Confirmative study on gross morphology, histopathology, and ultra-structural changes showed considerable effect on suckers, teguments and internal organs and were dose dependent. It is indicative that presence of terpenoids, flavonoids, tannins and phenolics which are contributing factors for anthelmintic activity, producing various degree of damage to suckers, teguments and internal organs. Hence D. linearis (Burm.f.) Underw. can be a lead for synthesis of a new trematodicidal drug as alternative for other drugs and overcome anthelmintic resistance and cost effective.