Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase and AmpC-producing Escherichia coli (ESBL/AmpC) are an emerging problem and are hypothesized to be associated with antimicrobial use (AMU), and more specifically with the use of third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins. Whether ESBL/AmpC also occur in organic dairy herds, which have restricted AMU, is not known. Additionally, it is unknown whether, in addition to restricted AMU, other factors in organic herd management are associated with ESBL/AmpC herd status. The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of ESBL/AmpC in organic dairy herds in the Netherlands. Subsequently, the relationships between the ESBL/AmpC herd status and AMU and between ESBL/AmpC herd status and farmers' management were assessed in organic dairy herds. For this study, 90 randomly selected, officially registered organic dairy herds were included. The ESBL/AmpC herd status was determined based on the bacteriological culture result of a slurry sample. The sensitivity of testing slurry samples for ESBL/AmpC herd status is less than 100% for detecting herds with a low ESBL/AmpC prevalence. For that reason, herds that tested positive for ESBL/AmpC in slurry were defined as positive and herds with negative slurry samples were defined as unsuspected. A comprehensive questionnaire on management practices was conducted and records on specified antimicrobials that were provided to these herds by the veterinary service providers were obtained. From the data on antimicrobial supplies by the veterinarian, the animal daily defined dose of antimicrobials per farm per year (DDDAF) was calculated. Descriptive statistics were used to describe the relation between the ESBL/AmpC herd status and DDDAF. Multivariable logistic regression models were used to evaluate management factors associated with the ESBL/AmpC herd status. We found ESBL/AmpC in 12 of the 90 (13%; 95% confidence interval=7-22%) slurry samples from organic dairy herds. The median DDDAF in organic dairy herds was 0.5, which was not significantly different between ESBL/AmpC-positive and unsuspected dairy herds. No association could be found between the use of different types of antimicrobials, such as third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, and ESBL/AmpC herd status. Factors that were associated with higher odds of being ESBL/AmpC-positive were pig farms located within a 2-km radius of the barn, applying parental treatment for clinical mastitis, and providing milk replacer to the female calves after colostrum intake. The prevalence of ESBL/AmpC in organic dairy herds appeared lower than the prevalence in previous studies conducted in conventional dairy herds. Apparently, ESBL/AmpC are also present in herds with low AMU; this indicates that other factors than AMU are also associated with ESBL/AmpC herd status.