Pharmaceutical products that are contaminated with Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) bacteria may pose serious consequences to vulnerable patients. Benzyldimethylalkylammonium chloride (BZK) cationic surfactants are extensively used in medical applications and have been implicated in the coselection of antimicrobial resistance. The ability of BCC to degrade BZK, tetradecyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride (C14BDMA-Cl), dodecyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride (C12BDMA-Cl), decyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride (C10BDMA-Cl), hexyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride, and benzyltrimethylammonium chloride was determined by incubation in 1/10-diluted tryptic soy broth (TSB) to determine if BCC bacteria have the ability to survive and inactivate these disinfectants. With BZK, C14BDMA-Cl, and C12BDMA-Cl, inhibition of the growth of 20 BCC strains was observed in disinfectant solutions that ranged from 64 to 256 microg/ml. The efflux pump inhibitor carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone increased the sensitivity of bacteria to 64 microg/ml BZK. The 20 BCC strains grew well in 1/10-diluted TSB medium with BZK, C12BDMA-Cl, and C10BDMA-Cl; they absorbed and degraded the compounds in 7 days. Formation of benzyldimethylamine and benzylmethylamine as the initial metabolites suggested that the cleavage of the C alkyl-N bond occurred as the first step of BZK degradation by BCC bacteria. Proteomic data confirmed the observed efflux activity and metabolic inactivation via biodegradation in terms of BZK resistance of BCC bacteria, which suggests that the two main resistance mechanisms are intrinsic and widespread. IMPORTANCE: Benzyldimethylalkylammonium chloride is commonly used as an antiseptic in the United States. Several recent microbial outbreaks were linked to antiseptics that were found to contain strains of the Burkholderia cepacia complex. Burkholderia species survived in antiseptics, possibly because of the degradation of antiseptic molecules or regulation of relevant gene expression. In this study, we assessed the efflux pump and the potential of B. cepacia complex bacteria to degrade benzyldimethylalkylammonium chloride and improved our understanding of the resistance mechanisms, by using proteomic and metabolic information. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic report of the intrinsic mechanisms of B. cepacia complex strain resistance to benzyldimethylalkylammonium chloride, based on the metabolic and proteomic evidence for efflux pumps and the complete biodegradation of benzyldimethylalkylammonium chloride.