BACKGROUND/AIMS: Hyperuricemia is part of the metabolic-syndrome cluster of abdominal obesity, impaired glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. Monocytes/macrophages are critical in the development of metabolic syndrome, including gout, obesity and atherosclerosis. However, how high uric acid (HUA) exposure affects monocyte/macrophage function remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism of HUA exposure in monocytes/macrophages and its impact on oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL)-induced foam-cell formation in a human monocytic cell line, THP-1. METHODS: We primed THP-1 cells with phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) for differentiation, then exposed cells to HUA and detected the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and analyzed the level of phospho-AMPKalpha. THP-1 cells were pre-incubated with Compound C, an AMPK inhibitor, or N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), a ROS scavenger, or HUA before PMA, to assess CD68 expression and phospho-AMPKalpha level. PMA-primed THP-1 cells were pre-treated with oxLDL before Compound C and HUA treatment. Western blot analysis was used to examine the levels of phospho-AMPKalpha, CD68, ABCG1, ABCA1, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and NF-kappaB (p65). Flow cytometry was used to assess ROS production and CD68 expression in live cells. Oil-red O staining was used to observe oxLDL uptake in cells. RESULTS: HUA treatment increased ROS production in PMA-primed THP-1 cells; NAC blocked HUA-induced oxidative stress. HUA treatment time-dependently increased phospho-AMPKalpha level in PMA-primed THP-1 cells. The HUA-induced oxidative stress increased phospho-AMPKalpha levels, which was blocked by NAC. HUA treatment impaired CD68 expression during cell differentiation by activating the AMPK pathway, which was reversed by Compound C treatment. Finally, HUA treatment inhibited oxLDL uptake in the formation of foam cells in THP-1 cells, which was blocked by Compound C treatment. HUA treatment significantly increased the expression of ABCG1 and reversed the oxLDL-reduced ABCG1 expression but did not affect the expression of ABCA1, NF-kappaB (p65) or COX-2. CONCLUSIONS: HUA exposure activated the ROS-AMPK pathway, impaired CD68 expression, and inhibited oxLDL-induced foam-cell formation in a human monocytic cell line, THP-1.