Nontyphoidal Salmonella are one of the leading causes of foodborne diseases in the world. As poultry products are recognized as main sources of human salmonellosis, nontyphoidal Salmonella control has become a global issue for the poultry industry. The increasing antimicrobial resistance in poultry-related nontyphoidal Salmonella serovars is a global matter of concern. By monitoring the evolution of antimicrobial resistance, alternative treatments can be identified and possible restrictions in the treatment of systemic human salmonellosis foreseen. A meta-analysis was conducted to assess the profile and temporal evolution of the antimicrobial resistance of nontyphoidal Salmonella of poultry and human origin in Brazil, isolated in the period from 1995 to 2014. Four databases were researched; twenty-nine articles met the eligibility criteria and were included in the meta-analysis. In the nontyphoidal isolates of poultry origin, the highest levels of antimicrobial resistance were verified for sulfonamides (44.3%), nalidixic acid (42.5%), and tetracycline (35.5%). In the human-origin isolates, the resistance occurred mainly for sulfonamides (46.4%), tetracycline (36.9%), and ampicillin (23.6%). Twenty-two articles described results of antimicrobial resistance specifically for Salmonella Enteritidis, also enabling the individual meta-analysis of this serovar. For most antimicrobials, the resistance levels of Salmonella Enteritidis were lower than those found when considering all the nontyphoidal serovars. In the poultry-origin isolates, a quadratic temporal distribution was observed, with reduced resistance to streptomycin in Salmonella Enteritidis and in all nontyphoidal serovars, and a linear increase of resistance to nalidixic acid in Salmonella Enteritidis. In the human-origin isolates, a linear increase was identified in the resistance to nalidixic acid in Salmonella Enteritidis and in all the nontyphoidal isolates, and to gentamicin in Salmonella Enteritidis. Continuous monitoring of the development and spread of antimicrobial resistance could support the measurement of the consequences on poultry and human health.