Contamination of surface waters by antimicrobial-resistant bacteria and pathogenic bacteria is a great concern. In this study, 531 Escherichia coli isolates obtained from the Yamato River in Japan were evaluated phenotypically for resistance to 25 antimicrobials. Seventy-six isolates (14.3%) were multidrug resistant (MDR), 66 (12.4%) were nonsusceptible to one or two classes of agents, and 389 (73.3%) were susceptible. We performed whole-genome sequencing of selected strains by using Illumina technology. In total, the genome sequences of 155 strains were analyzed for antibiotic resistance determinants and phylogenetic characteristics. More than 50 different resistance determinants, including acquired resistance genes and chromosomal resistance mutations, were detected. Among the sequenced MDR strains (n = 66), sequence type 155 (ST155) complex (n = 9), ST10 complex (n = 9), and ST69 complex (n = 7) were prevalent. Among extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC) strains (n = 58), clinically important clonal groups, namely, ST95 complex (n = 18), ST127 complex (n = 8), ST12 complex (n = 6), ST14 complex (n = 6), and ST131 complex (n = 6), were prevalent, demonstrating the clonal distribution of environmental ExPEC strains. Typing of the fimH (type 1 fimbrial adhesin) gene revealed that ST131 complex strains carried fimH22 or fimH41, and no strains belonging to the fimH30 subgroup were detected. Fine-scale phylogenetic analysis and virulence gene content analysis of strains belonging to the ST95 complex (one of the major clonal ExPEC groups causing community-onset infections) revealed no significant differences between environmental and clinical strains. The results indicate contamination of surface waters by E. coli strains belonging to clinically important clonal groups.IMPORTANCE The prevalence of antimicrobial-resistant and pathogenic E. coli strains in surface waters is a concern because surface waters are used as sources for drinking water, irrigation, and recreational purposes. In this study, MDR and ExPEC strains in river water were characterized by genomic sequencing and analysis. We detected more than 50 resistance determinants and identified clonal groups specific to MDR and ExPEC strains. This study showed contamination of surface waters by E. coli strains belonging to clinically important clonal groups. Overall, this study advances our understanding of environmental MDR and ExPEC strains.