The type I interferon (IFN) system has recently been suggested to play important and essential roles in the pathogenesis of myositis. However, a clarification of how type I IFNs could function as triggering factor(s) in the pathogenesis of myositis has yet failed. Through activation of the type I IFN system, the host defense peptide LL-37 carries numerous immunomodulatory properties and is implicated in the pathogenesis of several other autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The expression of LL-37 can be regulated by various endogenous factors including the active form of vitamin D (25(OH)D3). The aim of this study was to explore a potential role of LL-37 in relation to the type I IFN system in patients with polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) and to compare these with SLE patients and healthy controls. We investigated muscle (3 PM, 5 DM) and symptomatic (5 DM) and non-symptomatic (3 PM, 3 DM) skin biopsies from patients with short disease duration and muscle biopsies (3 PM, 1 DM) from patients with long disease duration. Six SLE patients with symptomatic and non-symptomatic skin and five muscle and six skin biopsies from healthy individuals served as controls. Tissue specimens were immunohistochemically stained for LL-37, neutrophils (CD66b), plasmacytoid dendritic cells (BDCA-2), myxovirus resistance protein A (MxA), and macrophages (CD68, CD163). In addition, LL-37 and CD66b double staining was also performed. Serum levels of 25(OH)D3 were investigated in PM and DM patients with short disease duration (3 PM, 5 DM) and in 40 healthy controls. We found that the expression of LL-37, BDCA-2 (the major producer of type I IFNs), MxA (an interferon-inducible protein), and macrophages were higher in muscle tissue of PM and DM patients compared to healthy controls. The LL-37 expression was mainly derived from neutrophils. Neutrophils were increased in both symptomatic and non-symptomatic skin of myositis and SLE patients and BDCA-2 was increased in symptomatic DM skin when compared to healthy controls. Moreover, the expression of MxA in symptomatic and non-symptomatic skin of SLE patients was higher when compared to both myositis patients and healthy controls. There was no difference in the expression of LL-37 in skin of myositis and SLE patients compared to healthy controls. All PM and DM patients with a short disease duration had low 25(OH)D3 levels compared to healthy controls. In conclusion, the present study supports our hypothesis that LL-37 may activate type I IFNs, which could initiate and perpetuate an inflammatory process. The prolonged exposure of the immune system to type I IFNs may eventually break tolerance and lead to autoimmune myositis.