OBJECTIVE/BACKGROUND: Humans have been in a constant battle with tuberculosis (TB). Currently, overuse of antibiotics has resulted in the spread of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MDR), leading to antibiotic ineffectiveness at controlling the spread of TB infection in host cells and especially macrophages. Additionally, the Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) has developed methods to evade the immune system and survive. With the discovery of nanoparticle (NP)-based drugs, it is necessary to research their anti-mycobacterial properties and bactericidal mechanisms. In this study, we synthesized mixed metal oxide NPs and tested their ability to inhibit Mtb growth into macrophages and investigated the cytotoxic effects of NPs in THP-1 cells. METHODS: Silver (Ag) NPs and zinc oxide (ZnO) NPs were synthesized by chemical reduction and chemical deposition in aqueous solution, and the diffraction light scattering, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and ultraviolet-visible light-absorption spectra were used to identify NP properties. Ag and ZnO NPs were mixed together at a ratio of 8ZnO/2Ag and diluted into Lowenstein-Jensen medium followed by the addition of bacteria and incubation for 28days at 37 degrees C. The toxicity of NPs to THP-1 cells was assessed by MTT test, and macrophages were infected with Mtb for 4h at 37 degrees C under 5% CO2. RESULTS: Nano-sized particles were estimated at approximately 30-80nm, and the initial concentration of Ag NPs and ZnO NPs were estimated at approximately 20ppm and approximately 60ppm. The minimal inhibitory concentration ratio of 8ZnO/2Ag NPs against Mtb was detected at approximately 1/32 of the initial concentration. Ag NPs in the range of concentrations exhibited no anti-Mtb effects, whereas ZnO NPs showed potent antibacterial activity at approximately 1/128 of the initial concentration. ZnO NPs at all concentrations showed cytotoxic activity, whereas 100% of THP-1 cells remained viable in the presence of Ag NPs at approximately 1/32 and approximately 1/64 of the initial concentrations. However, at ratios of 8ZnO/2Ag, approximately 39.94% of the cells at approximately 1/16 of the initial concentration remained viable, with 100% of THP-1 cells at approximately 1/32 of the initial concentration remaining viable. CONCLUSION: Although Ag NPs exhibited low cytotoxicity, they were unable to inhibit Mtb growth in vitro. ZnO NPs exhibited strong anti-Mtb activity and inhibited bacterial growth, but exhibited high cytotoxicity to human macrophage cells. By mixing Ag and ZnO NPs at a ratio of 8ZnO/2Ag, we acquired a mixture that exhibited potent antibacterial activity against Mtb and no cytotoxic effects on THP-1 cells, resulting in inhibition of both in vitro and ex vivo Mtb growth Figs. 1-3, Tables 1-3.