BACKGROUND: Integrons are mobile genetic elements that play an important role in the distribution of antibiotic-resistance genes among bacteria. This study aimed to investigate the distribution of integrons in clinical isolates of Klebsiella pneumoniae and explore the molecular mechanism of integron-mediated multiple-drug resistance in K. pneumoniae. METHODS: Class 1, 2, and 3 integrases were identified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) among 178 K. pneumoniae clinical isolates. Antibiotic susceptibility was examined by disk-diffusion method. Conjugation experiments were conducted to evaluate the horizontal-transfer capability, and multilocus sequence typing (MLST) assays were conducted to explore the genetic relationships among the isolates. Highly virulent serotypes were identified by PCR from the 44 integron-positive isolates with variable regions. RESULTS: Class1 and 2 integrons were detected in 60.1% and 1.7% of isolates, respectively. One isolate carried both class 1 and 2 integrons. Class 3 integrons were not detected in all 178 isolates. Among the 44 integrons containing variable regions, 39 were located in conjugative plasmids. Dihydrofolate reductase (dfrA) and aminoglycoside adenyltransferase (aad) were found to be the most common in class 1 and 2 integrons. These gene cassettes encoded resistance to trimethoprim and aminoglycosides. Moreover, the association between integron carriage and antibiotic resistance was most significant for aminoglycosides, phenicols, and fluoroquinolones. Among the 44 integron-positive isolates with variable regions, 9 were classified as highly virulent serotypes (k1, k2, k20, and k54). In addition, MLST analysis detected 13 sequence types (STs), with the predominant ones being ST11 and ST15. The eBURST analysis revalued the existence of 11 singleton STs and one group, which is comprised of ST11 and ST437. CONCLUSIONS: The wide diversity of detected integrons suggested that the horizontal transfer by mobile genetic elements played a major role in the distribution of antimicrobial resistance genes, thereby indicating the urgent need to use effective means of avoiding the spread of drug-resistant bacteria.