Salmonella infections can be seen in four clinical types, namely gastroenteritis, bacteremia/sepsis, enteric fever and carriage. These infections can result in uncomplicated diarrhea in most cases, but can lead to invasive disease requiring antimicrobial therapy and can be life-threatening in elderly or immunocomprimised patients. Broad-spectrum cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones are crucial options in the treatment of the invasive infections. Ciprofloxacin resistance is rarely seen in non-typhoid Salmonella enterica isolates, and only in S. Typhimurium, S. Choleraesuis and S. Schwarzengrund. In this report, we aimed to discuss a patient infected with ciprofloxacin-resistant Salmonella Kentucky under the light of data from our country and the world. A 52-year-old male patient wih acute myocardial infarction was hospitalized in intensive care unit of cardiovasculer surgery for left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation for the treatment of left ventricular disfunction. On the seventh day of LVAD and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), the patient presented high fever and productive cough. His physical examination revealed hyperemia around the insertion point of right jugular central venous catheter (CVC) and a serous discharge from the insertion point of LVAD located just below the inferior edge of sternum. Empiric IV cefoperazone/sulbactam (SCF) therapy was started with the prediagnosis of pneumonia and bloodstream infection. The blood samples taken from peripheral veins and CVC, and swabs taken from LVAD insertion point for culture when the patient was febrile, revealed the growth of bacteria with S type and lactose-negative colonies on EMB and SS media. Biochemical characteristics of the isolate were as follows: lactose fermentation negative, H2S positive, IMVIC (-,+,-,+), urease negative, lysine/ornithine decarboxylase positive and motile. The bacteria was then identified as Salmonella enterica serotype Kentucky (8,20;i;z6) by agglutination tests. Antibiotic susceptibility tests were conducted according to CLSI guidelines and it was found as ampicillin- and ciprofloxacin-resistant. Ciprofloxacin resistance of the isolate was confirmed with E-test. Stool culture was performed to investigate the source of infection, and S. Kentucky was isolated. On the 15th day of SCF treatment, LVAD was taken out, and tissue cultures taken from the fibrillar tissues between pericardial layers during surgery, also yielded S. Kentucky growth. On the second day of SCF therapy the patient's fever returned normal and on the seventh day, CBC and CRP values were normalized. Nevertheless, the clinical situation of the patient worsened gradually and on the 40th day he was intubated due to low oxygen saturation and pleural effusion. His antibiotherapy was stopped on 42nd day as the blood cultures were negative and his clinical situation was attributed to cardiac failure. The patient died four days after the antibiotherapy has stopped due to cardiac reasons. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case infected with ciprofloxacin-resistant Salmonella Kentucky in our country.