BACKGROUND: Infections caused by Acinetobacter baumannii were responsive to conventional antibiotic therapy. However, recently, carbapenem-associated multidrug resistant isolates have been reported worldwide and present a major therapeutic challenge. Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate (EGCG) extracted from green tea exhibits antibacterial activity. PURPOSE: We evaluated the antibacterial activity of EGCG and possible synergism with antibiotics in carbapenem-associated multidrug resistant A. baumannii. A potential mechanism for synergism was also explored. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy clinical isolates of A. baumannii collected from geographically different areas were analyzed by minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) of EGCG. Checkerboard and time-killing assays were performed to exam the synergism between EGCG and antibiotics. The effects of EGCG on a multidrug efflux pump inhibitor (1-[1-naphthylmethyl] piperazine; NMP) and beta-lactamase production were also examined in A. baumannii. RESULTS: Sixty-three of 70 clinical isolates of A. baumannii carried carbapenemase-encoding genes with carbapenem-associated multidrug resistance. Levels of MIC and MBC of EGCG ranged from 64 to 512microg/ml and from 128 to >/=1024microg/ml, respectively among the clinical isolates. MIC90 and MBC86 levels were 256microg/ml and 512microg/ml of EGCG, respectively. Subinhibitory concentration of EGCG in combination with all antibiotics tested, including carbapenem, sensitized (MICs fall</=1.0microg/ml) all carbapenem-associated multidrug resistant isolates. Checkerboard and time-killing assays showed synergism between EGCG and meropenem (or carbenicillin) counted as fractional inhibitory concentration of < 0.5 and cell numbers' decrease per ml of >2log10 within 12h, respectively. EGCG significantly increased the effect of NMP but was unrelated to beta-lactamase production in A. baumannii, suggesting EGCG may be associated with inhibition of efflux pumps. CONCLUSION: Overall we suggest that EGCG-antibiotic combinations might provide an alternative approach to treat infections with A. baumannii regardless of antibiotic resistance.