INTRODUCTION: Enterococcus spp. is considered as important etiological agents of nosocomial infections. However, a little is known about the epidemiology of vancomycin resistant Enterococcus faecalis (VREF). The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of VREF and detecting of two prevalent resistance genes (vanA, vanB) at Children Medical Center Hospital, an Iranian referral pediatric Hospital. MATERIALS AND METHODS: During January 2013 to December 2013, 180 E. faecalis were isolated from clinical samples of hospitalized children. Antimicrobial testing was performed by Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion to gentamicin, amikacin, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, ceftazidim, cefixime, piperacillin/tazobactam, cefepime, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, erythromycin, clindamycin, linezolide and E-test method vancomycin and teicoplanin according to Clinical Laboratories Standards Institute (CLSI). Two prevalent resistance genes (vanA, vanB) were investigated in VREF isolates. RESULTS: Seventy-five (42%) of patients were male and 105 (58%) were female. Mean age of patients was 34.74 months. Cephalosporin resistance was found in majority of E. faecalis isolates (98.7 to ceftazidim, 95% to cefixime, 93.3% to ceftriaxone, and 89.4% to cefotaxime). Most of the isolated were susceptible to cefepime (91.7%). In addition, high level of erythromycin and clindamycin resistance was reported (93.4% and 91.2%). There were no linezolid-resistant E. faecalis among all isolates. Teicoplanin resistance was observed in 13.8% of E. faecalis (n = 25). Minimum Inhibitory concentration (MIC) >/= 32 mug/ml for vancomycin was found in 29 isolates (16%) and vanA gene was detected in 21 (72%) VREF strains, while vanB gene was not detected in any of these isolates. The mortality rate of all cases was 3.4%. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed high rate of vancomycin resistance in E. faecalis strains. Therefore, periodic surveillance of antibacterial susceptibilities is highly recommended to detect emerging resistance.