INTRODUCTION: Coronal leakage is one of the constant concerns in routine dental practice. It is one of the factors responsible for the failure of root canal therapy. Permanent restorations should be given as soon as possible after the completion of root canal therapy. If unavoidable, provisional restoration should be given in such a way that it maximally reduced the leakage of microorganisms and fluids from the external environment into the canal space. Hence, we evaluated the effect of saliva on the coronal leakage of temporary restorations. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Biomechanical preparation of the root canals of 204 fresh mandibular first premolar teeth was done using endodontic files with intermittent irrigation of sodium hypochlorite solution and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. Alternate irrigation with normal saline was done periodically. After preparation, drying of the canals was done using paper points followed by sealing of the apical foramen. For the assessment of the microleakage, Siqueira et al apparatus and method was used. All the specimens were divided into four groups based on the provisional restorative material used. All the groups were further divided into three subgroups based on the presence and absence of intracanal medicaments. Verissimo et al's criteria were used to check the turbidity at 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-week interval respectively. All the results were analyzed by Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software. Chi-square test was used to measure the level of significance, and p < 0.05 was considered to be significant. RESULTS: In group I, all the subgroups' specimens showed significant difference at 1 week's time. Only the subgroup with no intracanal medicaments in Cavit-containing provisional restoration showed nonsignificant alterations. Statistically significant alterations were seen at 1, 2, and 3 weeks' interval in all the subgroups except for one with intracanal medicaments. CONCLUSION: All the temporary restorative materials were not able to prevent microleakage after 1 week's time, with worst bacterial resistance shown by Ketac Molar and ionomer restorative material. Future studies are advocated for better prognosis of root canal therapy.