Among the diseases complicating the course of calculous pyelonephritis, are among the leaders of diabetes mellitus, which is associated with reduced immune response, deterioration of renal hemodynamics, the reduced sensitivity to antibacterial drugs. The purpose of the study is to improve the results of treatment of patients with calculous pyelonephritis and diabetes mellitus type 2. The materials and methods of research. We studied 179 people. This was a retrospective pharmaco-epidemiological analysis of medical records of patients who were treated in 2009 and 2013, in hospital of Volgograd. Women in the study was greater than 99(by 55.4%), males - 80 (44,6%). All patients underwent standard clinical examination, with mandatory bacteriological urine analysis, ultrasound study of kidneys. RESULTS: During the observation period of 2009 and 2013 in patients with calculous pyelonephritis and type 2 diabetes, the major pathogens were representatives of the family Enterobacteriaceae. E.coli strains are constituted - 12 (54,5%), K. pneumoniae - 4 (18.1%) strains. In other etiologically significant microorganisms were Enterococcus spp. - 3 (13.6%) strain, P. aeruginosa - strain 2 (9%). The group of other (4.5%), we have carried pathogens isolated in the singular: Erobacter spp, S. aureus, and Klebsiella oxytoca. In patients with infection of the upper urinary tract and diabetes, there is a pronounced trend to decrease sensitivity to all groups of antibiotics. Sensitivity to unprotected penicillins and fluoroquinolones has decreased almost twice. Resistance to aminoglycosides of patients in this group increased by 23%. In patients with chronic calculous pyelonephritis and diabetes mellitus type 2 is high sensitivity of the main causative agents of infection to cephalosporins of the third and fourth generation (92%), protected beta-lactam penicillins (amoxicillin/clavulanate) - 86,4%, to carbapenemam is 89.4%. CONCLUSIONS: For the empiric treatment of infections of the upper urinary tract in patients with diabetes mellitus, can be recommended drugs: protected beta-lactam penicillins, cephalosporins of the third and fourth generation, carbapenem.