INTRODUCTION: Global usage of synthetic drugs inadvertently has resulted in deleterious effects and antimicrobial resistance. Phytoextarcts with therapeutic properties appear to be appropriate substitutes for synthetic drugs. Punica granatum (Pomegranate) is a fruit rich in nutraceuticals and therapeutic properties that has lead to its widespread use as folk-medicine for treating innumerable diseases. AIM: To determine the in vitro antifungal efficacy of Punica granatum peel extract against the oral Candida compared with clotrimazole. MATERIALS AND METHODS: An in vitro study was carried out on 60 saliva samples collected from patients confirmed by clinical and mycological examination as oral candidiasis and subjected to culture on Saborauds Dextrose Agar (SDA) medium and incubated at 37 degrees C for 48 hours. The cultured Candida species were subjected to antifungal susceptibility test by agar well diffusion method. Punica granatum peel extract (Group-I), Ethanol (Group-II Negative control), Clotrimazole (Group-III-Positive control) were inoculated in wells and incubated. Zones of inhibitions were measured with a digital Vernier's callipers and subjected to statistical analysis. ANOVA (analysis of variance) was performed to compare inhibition zones and concentrations of all the three groups. RESULTS: Antifungal efficacy of Punica granatum group and Clotrimazole group were statistically significant with p-value <0.05. Additionally, with the increase in the concentration there was an increase in the inhibitory efficacy against Candida species. Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) of peel extract of Punica granatum approximated with that of the clotrimazole. CONCLUSION: The present research was just a venture to usual clinical approach. The results of the study reveal that MIC of peel extract of Punica granatum approximated with that of the clotrimazole. Hence, peel extract of Punica granatum may be used as a substitute for antifungal agents in clinical trials with standardization so as to minimize the deleterious effects for patient compliance.