BACKGROUND: Current commonly accepted strategies to eradicate Helicobacter pylori in children are a 10-day sequential treatment or a triple therapy for 7-14 days. To avoid further expensive and possibly risky investigations as well as induction of secondary antimicrobial resistance, a success rate of elimination strategies over 90% in a per-protocol analysis is the target goal but rates observed in clinical trials are lower. Antimicrobial resistance is a well-recognized risk factor for treatment failure; therefore, only a treatment tailored to susceptibility testing should be recommended. Adherence to therapy is also a risk factor for treatment failure but that has been poorly studied. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the influence of adherence to therapy on the elimination rates obtained with different treatment regimens. METHODS: Cohort study analysis of children, aged 2-17 years, treated for Helicobacter pylori infection between October 2011 and December 2013. As a routine clinical practice, children infected with a strain susceptible to clarithromycin and to metronidazole received either a sequential regimen or a 10-day triple therapy while children infected with a strain resistant to clarithromycin or metronidazole received a 10-day triple regimen tailored to antimicrobial susceptibility. The eradication rate was assessed by a negative (13) C-urea breath test performed at least 8 weeks after the end of the treatment and adherence evaluated using a diary. RESULTS: One hundred forty-five children (67 girls/78 boys, median age 9.7 years) fulfilled the inclusion criteria, 118 being infected with a strain susceptible to both clarithromycin and metronidazole, 10 with a clarithromycin resistant, and 17 with a metronidazole resistant strain. A sequential regimen was prescribed in 44, a triple therapy containing clarithromycin in 84 and containing metronidazole in 17. Follow-up data were available for 130/145 and clearance of the infection observed in 105 of them. A concordance of more than 90% between the prescribed and the ingested drugs was observed in 109 children, between 50 and 90% in eight, less than 50% in 11 while these data were unknown for 2/130. A successful eradication was achieved for 89.9% of patients that received at least 90% of the prescribed drugs, whereas the eradication rate for nonadherent patients was 36.6%. Adherence above 90% was significantly higher in the absence of chronic concomitant disease, in the absence of adverse event and results in a significantly higher eradication rate. With the proposed strategy and an adherence higher than 90%, eradication was obtained in 98/109 children, the rate being only significantly superior to 90% with the sequential regimen. CONCLUSION: Adherence to therapy is a very important factor for the outcome and has to be assessed when evaluating the outcome of an H. pylori eradication regimen in order to understand the reasons of treatment failure. As we treated only after evaluation of the resistance of the H. Pylori strains, we were expecting to reach the given objective of 90% successful treatment. Children with adherence to treatment above 90% had a successful outcome of 89,9%, whereas nonadherent had a successful outcome of 36,8%. This is the first time that adherence has been assessed accurately.