Globally, coastal waters have emerged into a pool of antibiotic resistance genes and multiple antibiotic resistant microorganisms, and pathogenicity of these resistant microorganisms in terms of serotypes and virulence genes has made the environment vulnerable. The current study underscores the presence of multiple antibiotic resistant pathogenic serotypes and pathotypes of Escherichia coli, the predominant faecal indicator bacteria (FIB), in surface water and sediment samples of famous recreational beaches (Juhu, Versova, Mahim, Dadar, and Girgaon) of Mumbai. Out of 65 faecal coliforms (FC) randomly selected, 38 isolates were biochemically characterized, serotyped (for 'O' antigen), antibiogram-phenotyped (for 22 antimicrobial agents), and genotyped by polymerase chain reaction (for virulence factors). These isolates belonged to 16 different serotypes (UT, O141, O2, O119, O120, O9, O35, O126, O91, O128, O87, O86, R, O101, O118, and O15) out of which UT (18.4%), O141 (15.7%), and O2 (13.1%) were predominant, indicating its remarkable diversity. Furthermore, the generated antibiogram profile revealed that 95% of these isolates were multiple antibiotic resistant. More than 60% of aminoglycoside-sensitive E. coli isolates exhibited resistance to penicillin, extended penicillin, quinolone, and cephalosporin classes of antibiotic while resistance to other antibiotics was comparatively less. Antibiotic resistance (AR) indexing indicated that these isolates may have rooted from a high-risk source of contamination. Preliminary findings revealed the presence of enterotoxin-encoding genes (stx1 and stx2 specific for enterohaemorrhagic E. coli and Shiga toxin-producing E. coli, heat-stable toxin enterotoxin specific for enterotoxigenic E. coli) in pathogenic serotypes. Thus, government authorities and environmental planners should create public awareness and adopt effective measures for coastal management to prevent serious health risks associated with these contaminated coastal waters.