BACKGROUND: Treatment alternatives for DHA-1 harboring strains are challenging as it confers resistance to broad spectrum cephalosporins and may further limit treatment option when expressed at higher levels. Therefore, this study was designed to know the prevalence of DHA genes and analyse the transcription level of DHA-1 against different beta-lactam stress. METHODS: Screening of AmpC beta-lactamase phenotypically by modified three dimensional extract method followed by Antimicrobial Susceptibility and MIC determination. Genotyping screening of beta-lactamase genes was performed by PCR assay followed by their sequencing. The bla DHA-1 transcriptional response was evaluated under different cephalosporin stress by RT PCR. Transferability of bla DHA gene was performed by transformation and conjugation and plasmid incompatibility typing, DNA fingerprinting by enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus sequences PCR. RESULTS: 16 DHA-1 genes were screened positive from 176 Escherichia coli isolates and primer extension analysis showed a significant increase in DHA-1 mRNA transcription in response to cefotaxime at 8 microg/ml (6.99 x 10(2) fold), ceftriaxone at 2 microg/ml (2.63 x 10(3) fold), ceftazidime at 8 microg/ml (7.06 x 10(3) fold) and cefoxitin at 4 microg/ml (3.60 x 10(4) fold) when compared with untreated strain. These transcription data were found significant when analyzed statistically using one way ANOVA. Four different ESBL genes were detected in 10 isolates which include CTX-M (n = 6), SHV (n = 4), TEM (n = 3) and OXA-10 (n = 1), whereas, carbapenemase gene (NDM) was detected only in one isolate. Other plasmid mediated AmpC beta-lactamases CIT (n = 9), EBC (n = 2) were detected in nine isolates. All DHA-1 genes detected were encoded in plasmid and incompatibility typing from the transformants indicated that the plasmid encoding bla DHA-1 was carried mostly by the FIA and L/M Inc group. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the prevalence of DHA-1 gene in this region and highlights high transcription of DHA-1 when induced with different beta-lactam antibiotics. Therefore, cephalosporin treatment must be restricted for the patients infected with pathogen expressing this resistance determinant.