The poultry red mite, Dermanyssus gallinae, represents a key threat for the poultry industry worldwide. The control of D. gallinae is mainly achieved by continuous applications of acaricides. However, the fast-growing development of resistance, and the strict laws concerning chemicals admitted for treatments on food animals, highlighted the importance of alternative control tools. Here, we explored the potential of Artemisia sieberi essential oil against D. gallinae. In this study, the A. sieberi essential oil was analyzed using GC and GC-MS. The oil toxicity through contact and fumigant assays on adult mites was evaluated. The oil repellent activity was assessed on adult mites over different time intervals. Lastly, the residual toxicity of various doses of the oil was evaluated on D. gallinae until 14 days post treatment. GC and GC-MS showed that the oil was rich in alpha-thujone (31.5%), beta-thujone (11.92%), camphor (12.3%), and 1,8-cineole (10.09%). Contact toxicity on adult mites showed 50% lethal concentration (LC50), LC90, and LC99 of 15.85, 26.63, and 35.42 mug/cm(3), respectively. In fumigant assays, the oil was toxic on D. gallinae, and mortality was significantly higher in open containers over closed ones, underlining the key role of highly volatile constituents. Repellent assays showed that after 24 h from the treatment, all doses of the A. sieberi essential oil led to significant repellent activity over the control, except for 2 mug/cm(3). After 48 h, A. sieberi essential oil tested at all doses led to significant repellent activity, if compared to the control. Residual toxicity assays showed that time exposure and concentration tested had a significant impact on mite mortality after 1, 2, 5, and 7 days from the treatment. Notably, mortality remained significantly higher over the control for 7 days after spraying with oil at 2%. Further field assays with selected molecules from the A. sieberi essential oil are ongoing, testing them in synergistic blends, as well as in microencapsulated formulations.