Candida dubliniensis and Candida albicans are two closely related species. Although C. dubliniensis is less pathogenic, it has a higher propensity to develop resistance to fluconazole and some strains exhibit intrinsic resistance to 5-flucytosine (5-FC). All 5-FC-resistant isolates from Kuwait were previously shown to belong to one of seven internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of rDNA-based haplotypes. This study performed fingerprinting of C. dubliniensis isolates by multilocus sequence typing (MLST) to determine population structure of 5-FC-resistant and -susceptible strains and compared the results with data from a global collection of isolates. Fifty-two C. dubliniensis isolates previously analyzed and 58 additional isolates mostly collected during 2010-2013 and characterized by phenotypic and molecular methods were used. ITS-based haplotypes were identified by haplotype-specific PCR and/or by PCR-DNA sequencing of rDNA. Population structure was determined by 8-loci-based MLST. E-test was used to determine susceptibility to 5-FC, fluconazole, voriconazole and amphotericin B. Five ITS haplotypes (ITSH) were detected among 110 C. dubliniensis isolates. The ITSH1 was most common (n = 80 isolates) followed by ITSH4 (n = 25 isolates). Two isolates each belonged to ITSH5 and ITSH8 while one isolate belonged to ITSH7. MLST identified 16 diploid sequence types (DSTs) including six new DSTs. DST11 (n = 52) and DST14 (n = 25) were dominant genotypes and were confined (together with DST21) to Middle-Eastern countries. Other DSTs (excluding some new DSTs) had a wider global distribution as they were identified from various other countries. Only ITSH4 isolates (n = 25) belonged to DST14, were resistant to 5-FC and contained S29L mutation in CdFCA1. ITSH5, ITSH7 and ITSH8 isolates belonged to different DSTs. Thus, clinical C. dubliniensis isolates in Kuwait exhibited limited genotypic heterogeneity and most isolates belonged to region-specific DSTs. All 5-FC-resistant C. dubliniensis isolates belonged to ITSH4 and MLST-based DST14 genotype. Placement of some isolates into additional ITS haplotypes is also supported by MLST data.