OBJECTIVES: The widespread emergence of antimicrobial resistance has led many healthcare institutions to adopt more conservative antibiotic prescription practice guidelines for the treatment of acute otitis media (AOM). Little is known about the awareness and use of such guidelines by physicians in Jordan. Our aim was to pilot an anonymous survey instrument that would assess AOM treatment trends as well as awareness of and adherence to practice guidelines in Amman. By qualitatively assessing the management of AOM we could illuminate possible disparities in treatment trends, evaluate variability in practice guideline adherence, and help focus efforts of future educational programs that pertain to pediatric AOM management. METHODS: A total of 71 practicing physicians were anonymously surveyed in Amman, Jordan. The survey assessed awareness of and adherence to practice guidelines by prompting responses to hypothetical AOM cases. Differences in performance between various physician groups were noted. RESULTS: In total, participants answered 61.2% of the questions correctly. It was found that trainees would prescribe more appropriate antibiotics relative to attending physicians (p = 0.008). It was found that medical physicians followed guidelines more appropriately relative to ENT surgeons (64.2% of questions answered correctly vs. 58.1% of questions answered correctly; p = 0.015) and that physicians who report adhering to guidelines all/most of the time followed guidelines more appropriately relative to those who report adhering only sometimes or never (64.0% of questions answered correctly vs. 58.0% of questions answered correctly; p = 0.011). Also, cases that dealt with children were the most difficult for participants to diagnose as compared with cases that dealt with adults. CONCLUSION: We conducted the first known qualitative analysis of otitis media practices in Amman and found numerous shortcomings in AOM guideline familiarity. Awareness of practice guidelines can lead to more appropriate AOM management, but there is variability between groups in guideline familiarity and utilization. Interventions that promote more conservative antibiotic prescriptions could be targeted towards groups that prescribe antibiotics less appropriately relative to their colleagues e.g. attending physicians and ENT surgeons. Interventions could also target physicians who manage pediatric AOM cases as participants had the most difficulty in properly diagnosing cases that involved children and infants.