Tight regulation of gene expression is important for the survival of Deinococcus radiodurans, a model bacterium of extreme stress resistance. Few studies have examined the use of regulatory RNAs as a possible contributing mechanism to ionizing radiation (IR) resistance, despite their proffered efficient and dynamic gene expression regulation under IR stress. This work presents a transcriptome-based approach for the identification of stress-responsive regulatory 5' untranslated region (5'-UTR) elements in D. radiodurans R1 that can be broadly applied to other bacteria. Using this platform and an in vivo fluorescence screen, we uncovered the presence of a radiation-responsive regulatory motif in the 5' UTR of the DNA gyrase subunit A gene. Additional screens under H2O2-induced oxidative stress revealed the specificity of the response of this element to IR stress. Further examination of the sequence revealed a regulatory motif of the radiation and desiccation response (RDR) in the 5' UTR that is necessary for the recovery of D. radiodurans from high doses of IR. Furthermore, we suggest that it is the preservation of predicted RNA structure, in addition to DNA sequence consensus of the motif, that permits this important regulatory ability.IMPORTANCEDeinococcus radiodurans is an extremely stress-resistant bacterium capable of tolerating up to 3,000 times more ionizing radiation than human cells. As an integral part of the stress response mechanism of this organism, we suspect that it maintains stringent control of gene expression. However, understanding of its regulatory pathways remains incomplete to date. Untranslated RNA elements have been demonstrated to play crucial roles in gene regulation throughout bacteria. In this work, we focus on searching for and characterizing responsive RNA elements under radiation stress and propose that multiple levels of gene regulation work simultaneously to enable this organism to efficiently recover from exposure to ionizing radiation. The model we propose serves as a generic template to investigate similar mechanisms of gene regulation under stress that have likely evolved in other bacterial species.