PURPOSE: Evidence is scarce on subject-specific knowledge of multidrug-resistant organisms and rational use of antibiotics. We aimed at evaluating attitude, perception, and knowledge about multidrug-resistant organisms (MDRO) and antibiotic prescribing among urologists versus other medical specialties. METHODS: Within the MR2-study (Multiinstitutional Reconnaissance of practice with MultiResistant bacteria), a questionnaire was conducted targeting general surgeons, internists, gynecologists, and urologists in 18 German hospitals. The influence of medical specialty on predetermined endpoints was assessed by multivariable logistic regression models. RESULTS: With 456 evaluable questionnaires, the response rate was 43% (456/1061). Within seven workdays prior to survey, urologists prescribed antibiotics to >5 patients more often than non-urologists (50.7 vs. 24.3%; p < 0.001). Urologists were more confident regarding dosage, frequency, and duration of antibiotic treatment (p = 0.038) as well as in interpreting antibiograms (p < 0.001). Both urologists and non-urologists had poor knowledge about antibiotic stewardship. Urologists were more confident regarding local resistance patterns (p < 0.001). However, local rates of ciprofloxacin-resistant E. coli strains were correctly categorized by only 36.3 and 31.2% of urologists and non-urologists, respectively (p = 0.168). Compared to non-urologists, urologists more often acknowledged the use of broad-spectrum antibiotic agents as a problem, potentially resulting in increased resistance pattern (p = 0.036). Conversely, 31.5 and 30.7% of urologists and non-urologists (p = 0.424), respectively, would prescribe broad-spectrum antibiotics to a female patient with an uncomplicated urinary tract infection. Urologists did not attend more training courses regarding multidrug-resistance or antibiotic prescribing and did not perceive a better quality of discharge letters regarding MDRO. CONCLUSIONS: There is substantial need for advanced training regarding MDRO and antibiotic stewardship, regardless of medical specialty.