Nonfermenting Gram-negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii are widespread in the environment and are increasingly associated with nosocomial infections, often associated with multidrug-resistance phenotypes. This study aimed to evaluate epidemiological, physiological, and molecular characteristics of carbapenem resistance in P. aeruginosa and A. baumannii. In total, 63 nonreplicated strains (44 A. baumannii and 19 P. aeruginosa) were isolated from hospitalized patients. Antimicrobial resistance patterns, biocide tolerance, oxidative stress, hemolytic activity, and biofilm formation were assessed. Genetic markers related to beta-lactamase synthesis, efflux systems, and porin loss were screened by PCR. Epidemiological data of patients were analyzed. Advanced age, intensive care unit admission, invasive medical devices, treatment with fluoroquinolones or beta-lactams/beta-lactamase inhibitor combinations, and prolonged hospital stay were predisposing factors for infection. Colistin showed to be active in vitro against these bacteria. Carbapenem-resistant P. aeruginosa strains did not show hemolytic activity and were less tolerant to oxidative stress and biocides. However, increased ability of biofilm formation was observed, comparing to the carbapenem-susceptible isolates. Genetic markers related to oxacillinases synthesis (OXA-23 and OXA-143), oprD absence, and efflux pump (adeB) were detected in carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii. Screening for OXA-51-like gene was performed as confirmatory test for A. baumannii identification. In P. aeruginosa genes encoding efflux pumps (MexAB-OprM, MexCD-OprJ, MexEF-OprN, and MexXY-OprM) and SPM-1 were found; besides, oprD absence was also observed. Our results suggest that these organisms are well adapted to different environments and confirm the difficulty of therapeutic management of patients with infections associated with multidrug-resistant microorganisms, with direct impact on mortality and epidemiological control of these strains in health centers.