The escalating threat of antimicrobial resistance has increased pressure to develop novel therapeutic strategies to tackle drug-resistant infections. Antimicrobial peptides have emerged as a promising class of therapeutics for various systemic and topical clinical applications. In this study, the de novo design of alpha-helical peptides with idealized facial amphiphilicities, based on an understanding of the pertinent features of protein secondary structures, is presented. Synthetic amphiphiles composed of the backbone sequence (X1Y1Y2X2)n, where X1 and X2 are hydrophobic residues (Leu or Ile or Trp), Y1 and Y2 are cationic residues (Lys), and n is the number repeat units (2 or 2.5 or 3), demonstrated potent broad-spectrum antimicrobial activities against clinical isolates of drug-susceptible and multi-drug resistant bacteria. Live-cell imaging revealed that the most selective peptide, (LKKL)3, promoted rapid permeabilization of bacterial membranes. Importantly, (LKKL)3 not only suppressed biofilm growth, but effectively disrupted mature biofilms after only 2h of treatment. The peptides (LKKL)3 and (WKKW)3 suppressed the production of LPS-induced pro-inflammatory mediators to levels of unstimulated controls at low micromolar concentrations. Thus, the rational design strategies proposed herein can be implemented to develop potent, selective and multifunctional alpha-helical peptides to eradicate drug-resistant biofilm-associated infections. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are increasingly explored as therapeutics for drug-resistant and biofilm-related infections to help expand the size and quality of the current antibiotic pipeline in the face of mounting antimicrobial resistance. Here, synthetic peptides rationally designed based upon principles governing the folding of natural alpha-helical AMPs, comprising the backbone sequence (X1Y1Y2X2)n, and which assemble into alpha-helical structures with idealized facial amphiphilicity, is presented. These multifunctional peptide amphiphiles demonstrate high bacterial selectivity, promote the disruption of pre-formed drug-resistant biofilms, and effectively neutralize endotoxins at low micromolar concentrations. Overall, the design strategies presented here could provide a useful tool for developing therapeutic peptides with broad-ranging clinical applications from the treatment and prevention of drug-resistant biofilms to the neutralization of bacterial endotoxins.