Acinetobacter baumannii potential to form biofilm and exhibit multiple antibiotic resistances may be responsible in its survival in hospital environment. Accordingly, our study was aimed to determine the correlation between ability of biofilm formation and the frequency of biofilm related genes with antibiotic resistance phenotypes, and also the categorization of their patterns in clinical and environmental isolates. A total of 75 clinical and 32 environmental strains of the A. baumannii were collected and identified via API 20NE. Antibiotic susceptibility was evaluated by disk diffusion and microdilution broth methods. Biofilm formation assay was performed by microtiter plate method. OXA types and biofilm related genes including BlaOXA-51, BlaOXA-23, BlaOXA-24, BlaOXA-58, bap, blaPER-1, and ompA were amplified by PCR. The rate of MDR A. baumannii in clinical isolates (100%) was higher than environmental (81.2%) isolates (p < 0.05). Among 10 antibiotypes, the predominant resistance pattern in clinical and environmental isolates was antibiotypes I (85.3 and 78.1%, respectively). Analysis of the frequency of blaOXA-23 gene revealed a statistically significant difference between clinical (85.3%) and environmental (68.7%) isolates (p < 0.05). The prevalence of strong biofilm producers in clinical and environmental isolates were 31.2%-58.7%, respectively. In the clinical and environmental isolates, the frequencies of ompA, blaRER-1 and bap genes were 100%, 53.3%, 82.7% and 100%, 37.5%, 84.4% respectively. Statistical analysis revealed a significant correlation between the frequency of MDR isolates and biofilm formation ability (p = 0.008). The high frequency of antibiotype I would be indicated that an outbreak has been happened earlier and an endemic strain is currently being settled in the hospital environment. It would be suggested that if there was no difference in the frequency of pattern I and biofilm formation ability between clinical and environmental isolates, it is a critical point representing the higher risk of bacterial transmission from environment to the patients. The resulting data would be assisted in the improvement of disinfection strategies to better control of nosocomial infections. One dominant resistance pattern has shown among clinical and environmental isolates. The frequency of blaOXA-23 had significant difference between clinical and environmental isolates. The presence of bap gene in the A. baumannii isolates was associated with biofilm formation. There was a significant correlation between multiple drug resistance and biofilm formation. The clinical isolates had a higher ability to form strong biofilms compared to the environmental samples.