Bloodstream infections (BSIs) are among the significant causes of morbidity and mortality for patients of all age groups. However, very little is known about the trends of bacterial bloodstream infections and antimicrobial susceptibilities among pediatric and adult population from Nepal. In this study, we have investigated the different etiological agents responsible for bloodstream infections among pediatric and adult patients and the role of drug resistant organisms in these infections at a tertiary care teaching hospital of Kathmandu, Nepal. A total of 3,088 blood culture specimens obtained from pediatric and adult patients suspected to have bloodstream infections were processed by standard microbiological methods. Significant bacterial pathogens were identified by morphological, biochemical, and serological methods as suggested by American Society for Microbiology. In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method and interpreted according to the guidelines of Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Overall, incidence of bloodstream infections among the suspected patients was 7.48%. Pediatric patients (n = 90, 9.37%) were the significant subgroup of patients affected with bloodstream infections compared to adults (p < 0.05, CI-95%). Gram positive (n = 49, 54.4%) bacteria in pediatric and gram negative bacteria (n = 141, 78.7%) in adult patients were the most common isolates for BSI. Staphylococcus aureus (n = 41, 45.6%) in pediatric patients and Salmonella enterica (n = 40, 28.3%) in adult patients were the leading pathogens. Trends of antimicrobial resistance among isolated bacterial strains were significantly high in adults compared to pediatric patients. Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (31.4%), extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) (12.5%), and metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL) (3.9%) producing gram negatives were major resistant strains. Our study shows higher rates of bloodstream infections in pediatric patients compared to adult patients. Alarming rates of antimicrobial resistance among blood culture isolates is a serious issue. Prompt and accurate diagnosis and rational antimicrobial therapy are extremely needed.