To assess drug-drug interaction (DDI) potential for the three direct-acting antiviral (3D) regimen of ombitasvir, dasabuvir, and paritaprevir, in vitro studies profiled drug-metabolizing enzyme and transporter interactions. Using mechanistic static and dynamic models, DDI potential was predicted for CYP3A, CYP2C8, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1, organic anion-transporting polypeptide (OATP) 1B1/1B3, breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), and P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Perpetrator static model DDI predictions for metabolizing enzymes were within 2-fold of the clinical observations, but additional physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling was necessary to achieve the same for drug transporters. When perpetrator interactions were assessed, ritonavir was responsible for the strong increase in exposure of sensitive CYP3A substrates, whereas paritaprevir (an OATP1B1/1B3 inhibitor) greatly increased the exposure of sensitive OATP1B1/1B3 substrates. The 3D regimen drugs are UGT1A1 inhibitors and are predicted to moderately increase plasma exposure of sensitive UGT1A1 substrates. Paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir are BCRP inhibitors. Victim DDI predictions were qualitatively in line with the clinical observations. Plasma exposures of the 3D regimen were reduced by strong CYP3A inducers (paritaprevir and ritonavir; major CYP3A substrates) but were not affected by strong CYP3A4 inhibitors, since ritonavir (a CYP3A inhibitor) is already present in the regimen. Strong CYP2C8 inhibitors increased plasma exposure of dasabuvir (a major CYP2C8 substrate), OATP1B1/1B3 inhibitors increased plasma exposure of paritaprevir (an OATP1B1/1B3 substrate), and P-gp or BCRP inhibitors (all compounds are substrates of P-gp and/or BCRP) increased plasma exposure of the 3D regimen. Overall, the comprehensive mechanistic assessment of compound disposition along with mechanistic and PBPK approaches to predict victim and perpetrator DDI liability may enable better clinical management of nonstudied drug combinations with the 3D regimen.