Neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) are a group of diseases that, besides prevailing in poverty conditions, contribute to the maintenance of social inequality, being a strong barrier to a country development. Schistosomiasis, a NTD, is a tropical and subtropical disease caused by the trematode Schistosoma mansoni (Africa, Middle East, Caribbean, Brazil, Venezuela, Suriname), japonicum (China, Indonesia, the Philippines), mekongi (several districts of Cambodia and the Lao People's Democratic Republic), intercalatum and guianensis (areas of tropical rainforests in Central Africa) and hematobium (Middle East Africa, Corsica, France) whose adult forms inhabit the mesenteric vessels of the host, while the intermediate forms are found in the aquatic gastropod snails of the genus Biomphalaria. Currently, praziquantel (PZQ) is the first line drug chosen for the treatment of schistosomiasis according to the World Health Organization (WHO) Model List of Essential Medicines, 2015. PZQ chemotherapy is considered to be the most important development for decades in the treatment of schistosomiasis. Beside the PZQ, oxamniquine (OXA) has been first described in 1969 and launched in Brazil by Pfizer under the name of Mansil(R) for oral administration. It has a lower cost when compared to PZQ, being active in the intestinal and hepatosplenic infections caused exclusively by S. mansoni, single species in Brazil. Both PZQ and OXA have limitations, as low efficacy in the treatment of acute schistosomiasis, low activity against S. mansoni in immature stages and resistance or tolerance, which is the reason why further research are still necessary for the development of a second generation of antischistosomal drugs. For the development of new PZQ analogs, three main strategies can be adopted: (a) synthesis and evaluation of PZQ analogues; (b) rational design of new pharmacophores; (c) discovery of new active compounds from screening programs on a large scale. Such (b) approach is difficult as the target of PZQ still unknown, the synthesis of new active analogues is possible from delineation of structure-activity relationships for PZQ. Thus, we proposed for a review article an accurate analysis of PZQ and OXA medicinal properties and uses, focusing on the pharmacochemical aspects of both drugs through 178 bibliographic references. The mechanisms of action will be discussed, with the latest information available in the literature (for the first time in the case of the oxamniquine). Cases of resistance are also discussed. As both drugs are available as a racemic mixture the biological impact of their stereochemistry to activity and side effects are reviewed. The results obtained for the combination of PZQ and artemisinin derivatives against immature worms are also introduced in the discussion. Using the information about more than 200 PZQ new derivatives synthetized during almost 35years since its discovery, a deep structure-activity relationship (SAR) is also proposed in this study.