Background: . Travellers' diarrhea (TD) remains one of the most common illnesses encountered by travellers to less developed areas of the world. Because bacterial pathogens such as enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), enteroaggregative E. coli , Campylobacter spp. and Shigella spp. are the most frequent causes, antibiotics have been useful in both prevention and treatment of TD. Methods.: Results of trials that assessed the use of medications for the prevention and treatment of TD were identified through PubMed and MEDLINE searches using search terms 'travellers' diarrhea', 'prevention' and 'treatment'. References of articles were also screened for additional relevant studies. Results.: Prevention of TD with antibiotics has been recommended only under special circumstances. Doxycycline, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fluoroquinolones and rifaximin have been used for prevention, but at present the first three antibiotics may have limited use secondary to increasing resistance, leaving rifaximin as the only current option. Bismuth subsalicylate (BSS) (Pepto-Bismol tablets) is also an option for prophylaxis. Treatment with antibiotics has been recommended for moderate to severe TD. Azithromycin is the drug of choice, especially in Asia where Campylobacter is common. Fluoroquinolone antibiotics continue to be effectively used in Latin America and Africa where ETEC is predominant. BSS and loperamide (LOP) also are effective as standalone treatments. LOP may be used alone for treatment of mild TD or in conjunction with antibiotics for treatment of TD. Conclusions: . Historically, antibiotic prophylaxis has not been routinely recommended and has been reserved for special circumstances such as when a traveller with an underlying illness cannot tolerate TD. Antibiotics with or without LOP have been useful in shortening the duration and severity of TD. Emerging antibiotic resistance, limited new antibiotic alternatives and faecal carriage of antibiotic-resistant bacteria by travellers may prompt a re-evaluation of classic recommendations for treatment and prevention of TD with antibiotics.