OBJECTIVES: To describe the collaboration and prospective outcome of challenging human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) cases presented by Board of Prisons (BOP) pharmacists in consultation with Clinician Consultation Center (CCC) clinical pharmacists and physicians to improve correctional patient care. SETTING: Federal correctional facilities. PRACTICE DESCRIPTION: Pharmacists improve care of incarcerated persons infected with HIV. PRACTICE INNOVATION: Pharmacists evaluate, implement, and provide successful oversight of HIV/hepatitis C virus (HCV) care. EVALUATION: Retrospective review of the clinical outcomes of HIV and HCV coinfected cases implemented by BOP pharmacists following CCC clinical consultations from 2010 through 2012. RESULTS: Most cases focused on selecting optimal antiretroviral therapy (ART) regimens in patients experiencing treatment failure by interpreting resistance tests, limiting ART toxicity, identifying adherence strategies, and managing HIV/HCV coinfection. In 32 of the 34 cases presented, 87.5% (28/32) of CCC recommendations were implemented, resulting in 89% of those patients (25/28) achieving optimal virologic or clinical outcome. Complete virologic suppression occurred in 64% (18/28), and significant viral load reductions in 25% (7/28) of the cases. No changes occurred in 2 patients, and data were not available in 2 others lost to follow-up. BOP participation has increased since its inception from 6 to 12-15 pharmacists per call. Discussions also included updates in antiretroviral guidelines, screening and management of patients coinfected with HIV and HCV, and implications for BOP guidelines. CONCLUSION: BOP clinical consultant pharmacists can successfully implement CCC recommendations to achieve desired clinical outcomes. Consultations and educational efforts from CCC experts assist BOP pharmacists in ensuring excellence in management of complex HIV/HCV issues and medication regimens to achieve desired outcomes. CCC collaboration and BOP pharmacist involvement have improved patient care. Using a team approach to include BOP clinical pharmacists and obtaining expert opinion in management of other chronic illnesses may be a model that can be considered to improve correctional care.