This study evaluated the effects of enhanced concentrations of alpha-tocopherol and phenolic compounds on the resistance and stability of Perilla oil in transgenic Perilla frutescens plants against various tested pathogenic bacteria by over-expressing the gamma-tmt gene. The concentration of phenolic compounds in the non-transgenic samples was 9313.198 +/- 18.887 mug g(-1) dry weight (DW), whereas the total concentration of the transgenic samples ranged from 9118.015 +/- 18.822 to 10527.612 +/- 20.411 mug g(-1) DW. The largest increases in phenolic compounds in the transgenic plants in comparison with the control plants were observed in gallic acid, pyrogallol, 5-sulfosalicylic acid, catechin, chlorogenic acid, vanillin, syringic acid, naringenin, salicylic acid, quercetin, o-coumaric acid, kaempferol, and hesperetin. o-coumaric and benzoic acid acid were the most abundant phenolic acids found in the transgenic plants. Gram-negative bacteria (Salmonella typhimurium) were the most susceptible microorganism against transgenic ethyl acetate extracts with lower measurement of minimum inhibitory concentration (MICs) (0.25 +/- 0.03 mg/ml) at an extract concentration of 2 mg/ml in dried plant material. The same extracts were more effective against gram-positive bacteria (Bacillus subtilis) when compared to control plants with MICs values of 0.52 +/- 0.02 mg/ml. The suplementation of 20 mug of alpha-tocopherol (1000 ppm) in combination with ethyl acetate extracts enhanced the antimicrobial activity against S. typhimurium and B. subtilis, compared to the non-transgenic plants. The acid value of transgenic Perilla oil improved by 91.2% and 35.54% relative to the non-transgenic control oil and commercial Perilla oil, respectively. The low acid value suggests that the oil will be less susceptible to lipase action, and more economically viable and thus, may also improve the oil quality for industrial purposes. In addition, extracts obtained from transgenic plants could be a potential source of antimicrobial agents for the treatment of bacterial infections.