OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) and carbapenemase production among Enterobacteriaceae isolated from ambulatory patients with gastrointestinal complaints admitted to El-Ahrar General Hospital, Zagazig, Egypt in the period between January 2013 and May 2013. METHODS: One hundred and thirteen Enterobacteriaceae isolates were recovered from 100 consecutive Egyptian patients with community-onset gastrointestinal complaints. The fecal samples were plated directly on selective EbSA-ESBL Screening Agar and on MacConkey agar. Isolate identification was performed with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). Screening for ESBLs and carbapenemases production was done by both the automated VITEK(R)2 system with AST N198 and by disk diffusion method. Real-time PCR and sequencing were used to characterize the resistance genes. Phylogroups of the E. coli isolates were determined by a triplex PCR-based method. RESULTS: Of 100 patients screened for fecal colonization with extended-spectrum beta-lactamase -producing Enterobacteriaceae (ESBL-E) and carbapenemase- producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE), 68 were colonized with ESBL-E whereas five patients were positive for CPE. One hundred and thirteen Enterobacterceae isolates were recovered from 100 fecal samples, they belonged to E. coli (n = 72), Klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 23), Enterobacter cloacae(n = 3), Salmonella spp. (n = 1) and other Enterobacterceae isolates (n = 14). The blaCTX-M gene was detected in 89.04% (65/73) of the ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae, whereas blaSHV and blaTEM were detected in 30.14% (22/73) and 19.18% (14/73) respectively. Three out of 5 carbapenem-resistant isolates harbored New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase (NDM) and 2 produced Verona integron-encoded metallo- beta -lactamase (VIM). Twenty-two (47.83%) of the ESBL positive isolates were multidrug resistant (MDR). Phylogenetic analysis showed that, of the 51 ESBL-EC isolates, 17 belonged to group B2, 13 to group D, 11 to group A and 10 to group B1. CONCLUSIONS: Nearly two-thirds of the Enterobacteriaceae isolates recovered from feces of ambulatory patients with community-onset gastrointestinal complaints admitted to El-Ahrar General Hospital, Zagazig, Egypt were ESBL producers and one in every 20 patients included in our study was colonized by carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. These high colonization rates are worrying, therefore prudent antimicrobial use should be adopted in Egyptian community settings.