The prevalence and morbidity of P. vivax, P. ovale (curisi et wallikeri) and P. malariae remain underestimated. However important progress has been made. According to the WHO World Malaria report between 2000 and 2015 the malaria incidence has decreased by 42% while the incidence of malaria deaths has decreased by 66%. This is the result of the important progress made in scaling up the main interventions such the rapid diagnosis test, Artemisinin-based combination therapies, long lasting insecticide treated nets, indoor residual house spraying, intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy (IPTp-SP), Seasonal Malaria Chemoprophylaxis with combined antimalarial (SMClAQ-SP). In the Sahel region with a highly seasonal transmission, the use of SMC resulted in a reduction of malaria morbidity for 80% and a reduce mortality for 58%. Malaria elimination efforts are going on in many countries in Swaziland, South Africa, Namibia, Zanzibar (United Republic of Tanzania), Bioko Island (Equatorial Guinea), Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde, and maybe Senegal. For the time being only countries in Northern Africa and few in East Africa (Mauritius) have reached the elimination of local transmission. Despite the progress made near 500,000 malaria deaths occur annually in the African Region with 10-15% leading to disabling sequels and low school performance in children. Reaching the target of 80% for preventive and treatment interventions remain a challenge in many countries in Africa. It's important to keep in mind that the Abuja targets and MGDs were not reached by most African countries. In addition, among 12 million children eligible for SMC only 35% were covered despite the availability of resources in 2014. A huge global stock out of ACT. AQ-SP is possible. The development of an effective vaccine has been disappointing with a limited effectiveness of the RTS,S. The emerging resistance to Artemisinin derivate in South-East Asia and its possible expansion to Africa is of big concern. Anopheles gambiae resistance to pyrethroid make to situation even more complex. The situation can worsen because of factor such as climate change and socio-political crisis. Therefore the malaria situation in Africa is still of big concern despite the progress highlighted. Innovative a robust approach is needed with strong government commitment and partners support to lead battle. A new hope is emerging with the development of candidate vaccine from whole sporozoite, the other candidates vaccines blocking the transmission in phase 1b and the new SMC Plus strategy (AQ-SP+Azithromycine). Conclusion: lessons learnt from the malaria eradication era in the 50s must be factored in while developing the malaria elimination strategy for Africa by 2030.