Background:Helicobacter pylori infection is a known risk factor for duodenal ulcers, gastritis, and gastric cancer. The eradication of H. pylori is successful in treating these disorders; however, the success rate of eradication therapy is declining. There may be an interaction with nutrient intake to account for this decline.Objective: We investigated the influence of food and nutrient intake on H. pylori eradication therapy.Design: In this study, 4014 subjects underwent endoscopy, were tested for serum antibodies to H. pylori (2046 positive; 51.0%), and had their food intake assessed with the use of a food-frequency questionnaire (FFQ). Of the positive subjects, endoscopies showed that 389 (19.0%) had gastritis and/or duodenal ulcers and were also positive for a (13)C-urea breath test (UBT). These 389 subjects received 1-wk H. pylori eradication therapy with lansoprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin and a second UBT 8 wk after treatment. Complete demographic characteristics, serum lipid, insulin, glycated hemoglobin, C-reactive protein (CRP), and creatinine concentrations as well as complete FFQs were available for 352 subjects. Multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to determine factors that were associated with successful H. pylori eradication therapy.Results: The success rate of eradication therapy was 60.4% (235 of 389). Factors associated with the failure of eradication therapy included increased age (P = 0.02), higher CRP concentrations (P < 0.01), higher dietary cholesterol (P < 0.01) or egg intake (P < 0.01), higher omega-3 (n-3) fatty acid (P = 0.02) or fish intake (P = 0.01), and higher vitamin D intake (P = 0.02). Moreover, the higher vitamin D intake was strongly linked to higher fish intake. A limitation of the study is that we did not assess the antibiotic resistance of H. pyloriConclusions: Our results indicate that higher egg and fish intake may be negatively correlated with successful H. pylori eradication therapy in H. pylori-positive subjects with gastritis and/or duodenal ulcers.