Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) infection, associated with cystic fibrosis (CF) is intrinsically multidrug resistant to antibiotic treatment making eradication from the CF lung virtually impossible. Infection with Bcc leads to a rapid decline in lung function and is often a contraindication for lung transplant, significantly influencing morbidity and mortality associated with CF disease. Standard treatment frequently involves antibiotic combination therapy. However, no formal strategy has been adopted in clinical practice to guide successful eradication. A new class of direct-acting, large molecule polycationic glycopolymers, derivatives of a natural polysaccharide poly-N-acetyl-glucosamine (PAAG), are in development as an alternative to traditional antibiotic strategies. During treatment, PAAG rapidly targets the anionic structural composition of bacterial outer membranes. PAAG was observed to permeabilize bacterial membranes upon contact to facilitate potentiation of antibiotic activity. Three-dimensional checkerboard synergy analyses were used to test the susceptibility of eight Bcc strains (seven CF clinical isolates) to antibiotic combinations with PAAG or ceftazidime. Potentiation of tobramycin and meropenem activity was observed in combination with 8-128 mug/mL PAAG. Treatment with PAAG reduced the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of tobramycin and meropenem below their clinical sensitivity breakpoints (</=4 mug/mL), demonstrating the ability of PAAG to sensitize antibiotic resistant Bcc clinical isolates. Fractional inhibitory concentration (FIC) calculations showed PAAG was able to significantly potentiate antibacterial synergy with these antibiotics toward all Bcc species tested. These preliminary studies suggest PAAG facilitates a broad synergistic activity that may result in more positive therapeutic outcomes and supports further development of safe, polycationic glycopolymers for inhaled combination antibiotic therapy, particularly for CF-associated Bcc infections.