OBJECTIVE: (18)F-fluoromisonidazole (FMISO), a well-known PET imaging probe for diagnosis of hypoxia, is believed to accumulate in hypoxic cells via covalent binding with macromolecules after reduction of the nitro group. Previously, we showed the majority of (18)F-FMISO was incorporated into low-molecular-weight metabolites in hypoxic tumors, and the glutathione conjugate of reduced FMISO (amino-FMISO-GS) distributed in the tumor hypoxic regions as revealed by imaging mass spectrometry (IMS). The present study was conducted to clarify whether FMISO is metabolized to amino-FMISO-GS within tumor cells and how amino-FMISO-GS contributes to FMISO accumulation in hypoxic cells. We also evaluated the relationship between FMISO accumulation and the glutathione conjugation-related factors in the cells. METHODS: Tumor cells (FaDu, LOVO, and T24) were treated with (18)F-FMISO and incubated under normoxic or hypoxic conditions for 4 h. The FMISO metabolites were analyzed with LC-ESI-MS. Several glutathione conjugation-related factors of tumor cells were evaluated in vitro. FaDu tumor-bearing mice were intravenously injected with (18)F-FMISO and the tumors were excised at 4 h post-injection. Autoradiography, IMS and histologic studies were performed. RESULTS: Amino-FMISO-GS was the main contributor to FMISO incorporated in hypoxic FaDu cells in vitro and in vivo. Total FMISO uptake levels and amino-FMISO-GS levels were highest in FaDu, followed by LOVO, and then T24 (total uptake: 0.851 +/- 0.009 (FaDu), 0.617 +/- 0.021 (LOVO) and 0.167 +/- 0.006 (T24) % dose/mg protein; amino-FMISO-GS: 0.502 +/- 0.035 (FaDu), 0.158 +/- 0.013 (LOVO), and 0.007 +/- 0.001 (T24) % dose/mg protein). The glutathione level of FaDu was significantly higher than those of LOVO and T24. The enzyme activity of glutathione-S-transferase catalyzing the glutathione conjugation reaction in FaDu was similar levels to that in LOVO, and was higher than that in T24. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed that the expression levels of efflux transporters of the glutathione conjugate (multidrug resistance-associated protein 1) were lowest in FaDu, followed by LOVO, and then T24. CONCLUSIONS: FMISO accumulates in hypoxic cells through reductive metabolism followed by glutathione conjugation. We illustrated the possibility that increased production and decreased excretion of amino-FMISO-GS contribute to FMISO accumulation in tumor cells under hypoxic conditions.