INTRODUCTION: Growing resistance of pathogens to antibiotics, including cross-resistance to other antimicrobial classes that are used in the treatment of recurrent infections of the lower urinary system in children demands constant control of issues of regional antibiotic resistance. In the present days, in the empirical treatment of such patients physicians still choose medications with preserved activity in relation to E. coli. The aim of our study was to investigate the regional features of microbial landscape of urine in children with cystitis and study the efficacy of 7-day administration of Furamag medicinal drug for the treatment of recurrent episodes of this disease in children. MATERIAL AND METHODS: 65 children aged 5 to 16 years underwent clinical and laboratory examinations. The patients in Group I (33 children) received Furamag as an antimicrobial therapy; the comparison group consisted of patients (32 children) who received cefuroxime axetil. The both therapies course duration was 7 days. RESULTS: Bacteriological examination results were indicative of prevalence of gram-negative opportunistic microflora; in particular, E. coli prevailed in the structure of isolated causative agents (61.9%). Analysis of detected pathogens susceptibility to antimicrobial agents showed a high level of E.coli resistance to ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanate and gentamicin (in 97.4% of cases), and in 50% of cases the E.coli were resistant to cefotaxime, ceftriaxone and cefuroxime. High rates of resistance of Enterococcus spp. (100%) and Enterobacter spp. (96.7%) to cefuroxime, cefotaxime and ceftriaxone were recorded. Furamag demonstrated significantly higher bacteriological efficacy vs. cefuroxime axetil as for eradication of the most clinically significant causative agents of cystitis identified in the Poltava region (93.9% and 68.8%, respectively, p <0.05). During the follow-up study, anti-relapse efficacy of Furamag appeared to be 1.5 times higher as compared to the reference drug in the children examined (p <0.05).