Introduction: Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a growing concern in Europe, vaccination coverage is inadequate, and young adults, who are the highest antibiotic consumers, have the lowest level of knowledge. Extension of the e-Bug project, a European educational school programme concerning microbes, antibiotics and vaccination, to 15-18-year-olds implies the development of educational resources based on social marketing to promote sustainable behavioural changes. The objectives of the present study, which is part of the needs assessment in France, are to explore the attitudes, knowledge and behaviour of 15-18-year-olds concerning antibiotics and vaccination and their health education needs. Methods: Individual semi-structured interviews were conducted using purposeful sampling of 15- to 18-year-olds, until data saturation, and were transcribed and analysed. Results: The results confirm that teenagers are high antibiotic consumers with poor knowledge. They are interested in their health, but less so in antibiotics and vaccination. Health information is mainly obtained from the Internet, but tends to be criticised. General practitioners play an important role in terms of health information and are also influenced by peers and family. Teenagers believe school should play an important role in health education, which they would prefer to be more interactive: debates, case-stories, sharing experience with peers, parents and health professionals, based on relevant concrete examples, via new technologies. Conclusion: Knowledge gaps revealed among young people during this survey confirm that this age-group should be targeted by a specifically tailored approach. Responders are receptive to information provided by reliable and easily accessible sources. High schools, as well as general practitioners, play an important role in health education in general for this age-group and particularly concerning antibiotics and vaccinations. The Internet is a relevant medium for disseminating information. Teaching should be interactive and take social influences (peers, family) into account.