Bacterial resistance has risen as an important health problem with impact on the pharmaceutical industry because many antibiotics have become ineffective, which has affected their commercialization. The Brazilian biodiversity is marked by a vast variety of natural products with significant therapeutic potential, which could bring new perspectives in the treatment of infections caused by resistant microorganisms. The present study aimed to evaluate the antibacterial effect of the essential oil obtained from Eugenia jambolana (EjEO) using the method of microdilution method to determine the Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC). The modulatory effect of this oil on antibiotic activity was determined using both the broth microdilution and gaseous contact methods. The antibacterial effect of the association of the gaseous contact and the use of a LED unit with red and blue lights was also determined. The chemical components of the EjEO were characterized by HPLC, which revealed the presence of alpha-pinene as a major constituent. The EjEO presented a MIC>/=128mug/mL against S. aureus and >/=1024mug/mL against E. coli. The combination of the EjEO with antibiotics presented synergism against E. coli and antagonism against S. aureus. An antagonistic effect was obtained from the association of EjEO with amikacin and erythromycin by the method of gaseous contact. On the other hand, the association of EjEO with ciprofloxacin presented a synergistic effect against S. aureus and E. coli exposed to LED lights. A similar effect was observed in the association of the EjEO with norfloxacin presented synergism against S. aureus in the same conditions. In conclusion, our results demonstrated that the essential oil obtained from Eugenia jambolana interfere with the action of antibiotics against bacteria exposed to LED lights. Thus, further researches are required to elucidate the mechanisms underlying these effects, which could open new perspectives in the development of new antibacterial therapies.