OBJECTIVE: Antimicrobial resistance is an increasing global health problem. Very little data on resistance patterns of pathogenic bacteria in low-income countries exist. The aim of this study was to measure the prevalence of antimicrobial drug resistant bacteria carried by in- and outpatients in the resource constraint setting of a secondary care hospital in Zambia. Nasal and rectal samples from 50 in- and 50 outpatients were collected. Patients were randomly selected and informed consent was obtained. Nasal samples were tested for the presence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and rectal samples for Gram-negative rods (family of Enterobacteriaceae) non-susceptible to gentamicin, ciprofloxacin and ceftriaxone. Additionally, E-tests were performed on ceftriaxone-resistant Enterobacteriaceae to detect extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs). RESULTS: 14% of inpatients carried S. aureus, and 18% of outpatients. No MRSA was found. 90% of inpatients and 48% of outpatients carried one or more Enterobacteriaceae strains (75% Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumonia) resistant to gentamicin, ciprofloxacin and/or ceftriaxone (p < 0.001). Among inpatients gentamicin resistance was most prevalent (in 78%), whereas among outpatients ciprofloxacin resistance prevailed (in 38%). All ceftriaxone-resistant Enterobacteriaceae were ESBL-positive; these were present in 52% of inpatients versus 12% of outpatients (p < 0.001). We conclude it is feasible to perform basic microbiological procedures in the hospital laboratory in a low-income country and generate data on antimicrobial susceptibility. The high prevalence of antimicrobial drug resistant Enterobacteriaceae carried by in- and outpatients is worrisome. In order to slow down antimicrobial resistance, surveillance data on local susceptibility patterns of bacteria are a prerequisite to generate guidelines for antimicrobial therapy, to guide in individual patient treatment and to support implementation of infection control measures in a hospital.