The specific antimicrobial resistance (AMR) decreases that can be expected from reducing antimicrobial (AM) use in United States (US) beef production have not been defined. To address this data gap, feces were recovered from 36 lots of "raised without antibiotics" (RWA) and 36 lots of "conventional" (CONV) beef cattle. Samples (N = 719) were collected during harvest and distributed over a year. AMR was assessed by: i) culture of six AM-resistant bacteria (ARB); ii) qPCR for 10 AMR genes (ARGs); iii) an qPCR array of 84 ARGs; and iv) metagenomic sequencing. Generally, AMR levels were similar, but some were higher in CONV. The prevalence of third-generation cephalosporin-resistant (3GC(r)) Escherichia coli was marginally different between production systems (47.5 % CONV, 34.8% RWA, P = 0.04), but the seasonal effect (92.8% summer, 48.3% winter, P < 0.01) was greater. Erythromycin-resistant (ERY(r)) Enterococcus spp. concentrations significantly differed between production systems (CONV = 1.91 log10 CFU/g, RWA = 0.73 log10 CFU/g, P < 0.01). Levels of aadA1, ant(6)-I, blaACI, erm(A), erm(B), erm(C), erm(F), erm(Q), tet(A), tet(B), tet(M), and tet(X) ARGs were higher (P < 0.05) in CONV. Aggregate abundances of all 43 ARGs detected by metagenomic sequencing and the aggregate abundances of ARGs in the aminoglycoside, beta-lactam, macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B (MLSB), and tetracycline AM classes did not differ (log2 fold change < 1.0) between CONV and RWA. These results suggest that further reductions of AM use in US beef cattle production may not yield significant AMR reductions beyond MLSB and tetracycline resistance.IMPORTANCE The majority of AM use in the US is for food-animal production, leading to concerns that typical AM use patterns during CONV beef cattle production in the US contribute broadly to AMR occurrence. In the present study, levels of AMR were generally similar between CONV and RWA cattle. Only a limited number of modest AMR increases were observed in CONV, primarily involving MLSB and tetracycline resistance. Macrolides (tylosin) and tetracyclines (chlortetracycline) are administered in-feed for relatively long durations to reduce liver abscesses. To ensure judicious AM use, the animal health, economic, and AMR impacts of shorter duration in-feed administration of these AMs should be examined. However, given the modest AMR reductions observed, further reductions of AM use in US beef cattle production may not yield significant AMR reductions beyond MLSB and tetracycline resistance.