Multidrug efflux protein complexes such as AcrAB-TolC from Escherichia coli are paramount in multidrug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria and are also implicated in other processes such as virulence and biofilm formation. Hence efflux pump inhibition, as a means to reverse antimicrobial resistance in clinically relevant pathogens, has gained increased momentum over the past two decades. Significant advances in the structural and functional analysis of AcrB have informed the selection of efflux pump inhibitors (EPIs). However, an accurate method to determine the kinetics of efflux pump inhibition was lacking. In this study we standardised and optimised surface plasmon resonance (SPR) to probe the binding kinetics of substrates and inhibitors to AcrB. The SPR method was also combined with a fluorescence drug binding method by which affinity of two fluorescent AcrB substrates were determined using the same conditions and controls as for SPR. Comparison of the results from the fluorescent assay to those of the SPR assay showed excellent correlation and provided validation for the methods and conditions used for SPR. The kinetic parameters of substrate (doxorubicin, novobiocin and minocycline) binding to AcrB were subsequently determined. Lastly, the kinetics of inhibition of AcrB were probed for two established inhibitors (phenylalanine arginyl beta-naphthylamide and 1-1-naphthylmethyl-piperazine) and three novel EPIs: 4-isobutoxy-2-naphthamide (A2), 4-isopentyloxy-2-naphthamide (A3) and 4-benzyloxy-2-naphthamide (A9) have also been probed. The kinetic data obtained could be correlated with inhibitor efficacy and mechanism of action. This study is the first step in the quantitative analysis of the kinetics of inhibition of the clinically important RND-class of multidrug efflux pumps and will allow the design of improved and more potent inhibitors of drug efflux pumps. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Beyond the Structure-Function Horizon of Membrane Proteins edited by Ute Hellmich, Rupak Doshi and Benjamin McIlwain.