BACKGROUND: The objective of the current study was to assess the in vitro antiplasmodial activities of leaf, bark, flower, and the root of Pongamia pinnata against chloroquine-sensitive Plasmodium falciparum (3D7 strain), cytotoxicity against Brine shrimp larvae and THP-1 cell line. For in vivo study, the plant extract which has shown potent in vitro antimalarial activity was tested against Plasmodium berghei (ANKA strain). METHODS: The plant Pongamia pinnata was collected from the herbal garden of Acharya Nagarjuna University of Guntur district, Andhra Pradesh, India. Sequentially crude extracts of methanol (polar), chloroform (non-polar), hexane (non-polar), ethyl acetate (non-polar) and aqueous (polar) of dried leaves, bark, flowers and roots of Pongamia pinnata were prepared using Soxhlet apparatus. The extracts were screened for in vitro antimalarial activity against P. falciparum 3D7 strain. The cytotoxicity studies of crude extracts were conducted against Brine shrimp larvae and THP-1 cell line. Phytochemical analysis of the plant extracts was carried out by following the standard methods. The chemical injury to erythrocytes due to the plant extracts was checked. The in vivo study was conducted on P. berghei (ANKA) infected BALB/c albino mice by following 4-Day Suppressive, Repository, and Curative tests. RESULTS: Out of all the tested extracts, the methanol extract of the bark of Pongamia pinnata had shown an IC50 value of 11.67 mug/mL with potent in vitro antimalarial activity and cytotoxicity evaluation revealed that this extract was not toxic against Brine shrimp and THP-1 cells. The injury to erythrocytes analysis had not shown any morphological alterations and damage to the erythrocytes after 48 h of incubation. Because methanolic bark extract of Pongamia pinnata has shown good antimalarial activity in vitro, it was also tested in vivo. So the extract had exhibited an excellent activity against P. berghei malaria parasite while decrement of parasite counts was moderately low and dose-dependent (P < 0.05) when compared to the control groups, which shown a daily increase of parasitemia, unlike the CQ-treated groups. The highest concentration of the extract (1000 mg/kg b.wt./day) had shown 83.90, 87.47 and 94.67% of chemo-suppression during Suppressive, Repository, and Curative tests respectively which is almost nearer to the standard drug Chloroquine (5 mg/kg b.wt./day). Thus, the study has revealed that the methanolic bark extract had shown promisingly high ((P < 0.05) and dose-dependent chemo-suppression. The phytochemical screening of the crude extracts had shown the presence of alkaloids, flavonoids, triterpenes, tannins, carbohydrates, phenols, coumarins, saponins, phlobatannins and steroids. CONCLUSIONS: The present study is useful to develop new antimalarial drugs in the scenario of the growing resistance to the existing antimalarials. Thus, additional research is needed to characterize the bioactive molecules of the extracts of Pongamia pinnata that are responsible for inhibition of malaria parasite.