Staphylococcus aureus, although generally identified as a commensal, is also a common cause of human bacterial infections, including of the skin and other soft tissues, bones, bloodstream, and respiratory tract. The history of S. aureus treatment is marked by the development of resistance to each new class of antistaphylococcal antimicrobial drugs, including the penicillins, sulfonamides, tetracyclines, glycopeptides, and others, complicating therapy. S. aureus isolates identified in the 1960s were sometimes resistant to methicillin, a ss-lactam antimicrobial active initially against a majority S. aureus strains. These MRSA isolates, resistant to nearly all ss-lactam antimicrobials, were first largely confined to the health care environment and the patients who attended it. However, in the mid-1990s, new strains, known as community-associated (CA-) MRSA strains, emerged. CA-MRSA organisms, compared with health care-associated (HA-) MRSA strain types, are more often susceptible to multiple classes of non ss-lactam antimicrobials. While infections caused by methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) strains are usually treated with drugs in the ss-lactam class, such as cephalosporins, oxacillin or nafcillin, MRSA infections are treated with drugs in other antimicrobial classes. The glycopeptide drug vancomycin, and in some countries teicoplanin, is the most common drug used to treat severe MRSA infections. There are now other classes of antimicrobials available to treat staphylococcal infections, including several that have been approved after 2009. The antimicrobial management of invasive and noninvasive S. aureus infections in the ambulatory and in-patient settings is the topic of this review. Also discussed are common adverse effects of antistaphylococcal antimicrobial agents, advantages of one agent over another for specific clinical syndromes, and the use of adjunctive therapies such as surgery and intravenous immunoglobulin. We have detailed considerations in the therapy of noninvasive and invasive S. aureus infections. This is followed by sections on specific clinical infectious syndromes including skin and soft tissue infections, bacteremia, endocarditis and intravascular infections, pneumonia, osteomyelitis and vertebral discitis, epidural abscess, septic arthritis, pyomyositis, mastitis, necrotizing fasciitis, orbital infections, endophthalmitis, parotitis, staphylococcal toxinoses, urogenital infections, and central nervous system infections.