This cross-sectional descriptive study was done to analyse the current trends of using antimicrobials in various surgical procedures at Obstetrics and Gynaecology department in Mymensingh Medical College Hospital, Mymensingh from July 2014 to June 2015. Among 300 postoperative obstetrics and gynaecological surgery cases, samples were selected as non-random purposive selection method where pattern of using antimicrobials were analysed by SPSS method 20.1 versions. The incidence of antimicrobial resistance is on continued rise with a threat to return to the pre-antibiotic era. This has led to emergence of such bacterial infections which are essentially untreatable by the current armamentarium of available treatment options. Now-a-days variation of choosing antibiotic are quietly accepted in Obstetrics and Gynaecology department as prophylaxis purpose to control life threatening conditions such as postoperative wound infection, septicaemia, urinary tract infection etc. The data analysis revealed that among 300 obstetrical and gynaecological surgeries, Nitroimidazoles (93.33%), Cephalosporins (91%) and Aminoglycosides (59%) group were most commonly used antimicrobials in both obstetrics and gynaecological surgeries. Metronidazole (93.33%), Ceftriaxone (68.66%), Gentamicin (60.33%), Cefuroxime (48%), Flucloxacillin (42%), Cefixime (27%) were the most commonly used antimicrobials at obstetrics and gynaecology department. Combination of Ceftriaxone, Metronidazole and Gentamicin (37.66%), Ceftriaxone and Metronidazole (25.33%), Cefuroxime, Metronidazole and Gentamicin (16%), Ciprofloxacin, Metronidazole and Gentamicin (5.33%) were most commonly used antimicrobials postoperatively. Total mean duration of antimicrobial therapy was 10.45 days. Antibiotics are useful in prevention of infection. But indiscriminately use of antibiotics without any guideline may lead to antimicrobial resistance. So, antimicrobial surveillance committee should be formed by hospital authority to know the local using pattern of antibiotics.