BACKGROUND: Extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) and metallo beta-lactamase (MBL) production in Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli are the commonest modes of drug resistance among these commonly isolated bacteria from clinical specimens. So the main purpose of our study was to determine the burden of ESBL and MBL production in E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolated from clinical samples. Further, the antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of E. coli and K. pneumoniae were also determined. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted at Om Hospital and Research Centre, Kathmandu, Nepal by using the E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolated from different clinical samples (urine, pus, body fluids, sputum, blood) from May 2015 to December 2015. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion technique. Extended spectrum beta-lactamase production was detected by combined disc method using ceftazidime and ceftazidime/clavulanic acid discs and cefotaxime and cefotaxime/clavulanic acid discs. Similarly, metallo beta-lactamase production was detected by combined disc assay using imipenem and imipenem/ethylenediaminetetracetate discs. Bacteria showing resistance to at least three different classes of antibiotics were considered multidrug resistant (MDR). RESULTS: Of total 1568 different clinical samples processed, 268 (17.1%) samples were culture positive. Among which, E. coli and K. pneumoniae were isolated from 138 (51.5%) and 39 (14.6%) samples respectively. Of the total isolates 61 (34.5%) were ESBL producers and 7 (4%) isolates were found to be MBL producers. High rates of ESBL production (35.9%) was noted among the clinical isolates from outpatients, however no MBL producing strains were isolated from outpatients. Among 138 E. coli and 39 K. pneumoniae, 73 (52.9%) E. coli and 23 (59%) K. pneumoniae were multidrug resistant. The lowest rates of resistance was seen toward imipenem followed by piperacillin/tazobactam, amikacin and cefoperazone/sulbactam. CONCLUSIONS: High rate of ESBL production was found in the E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolated from outpatients suggesting the dissemination of ESBL producing isolates in community. This is very serious issue and can't be neglected. Regular monitoring of rates of ESBL and MBL production along with multidrug resistance among clinical isolates is very necessary.