Previously, Bithionol (BT) was shown to enhance the chemosensitivity of ovarian cancer cell lines to cisplatin treatment. In the present study, we focused on the anti-tumor potential of the BT-paclitaxel combination when added to a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines. This in vitro study aimed to 1) determine the optimum schedule for combination of BT and paclitaxel and 2) assess the nature and mechanism(s) underlying BT-paclitaxel interactions. The cytotoxic effects of both drugs either alone or in combination were assessed by presto-blue cell viability assay using six human ovarian cancer cell lines. Inhibitory concentrations to achieve 50% cell death (IC50) were determined for BT and paclitaxel in each cell line. Changes in levels of cleaved PARP, XIAP, bcl-2, bcl-xL, p21 and p27 were determined via immunoblot. Luminescent and colorimetric assays were used to determine caspases 3/7 and autotaxin (ATX) activity. Cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) were measured by flow cytometry. Our results show that the efficacy of the BT-paclitaxel combination depends upon the concentrations and sequence of addition of paclitaxel and BT. Pretreatment with BT followed by paclitaxel resulted in antagonistic interactions whereas synergistic interactions were observed when both drugs were added simultaneously or when cells were pretreated with paclitaxel followed by BT. Synergistic interactions between BT and paclitaxel were attributed to increased ROS generation and enhanced apoptosis. Decreased expression of pro-survival factors (XIAP, bcl-2, bcl-xL) and increased expression of pro-apoptotic factors (caspases 3/7, PARP cleavage) was observed. Additionally, increased expression of key cell cycle regulators p21 and p27 was observed. These results show that BT and paclitaxel interacted synergistically at most drug ratios which, however, was highly dependent on the sequence of the addition of drugs. Our results suggest that BT-paclitaxel combination therapy may be effective in sensitizing ovarian cancer cells to paclitaxel treatment, thus mitigating some of the toxic effects associated with high doses of paclitaxel.