A series of peptides with a long fatty acyl chain covalently attached to the C-terminal part and a free amine (-NH2) group at the N-terminus have been designed so that these molecules can be assembled in aqueous medium by using various noncovalent interactions. Five different peptide amphiphiles with a general chemical formula [H2N-(CH2)nCONH-Phe-CONHC12 (n = 1-5, C12 = dodecylamine)] have been synthesized, characterized, and examined for self-assembly and hydrogelation. All of these molecules [P1 (n = 1), P2 (n = 2), P3 (n = 3), P4 (n = 4), P5 (n = 5)] form thermoresponsive hydrogels in water (pH 6.6) with a nanofibrillar network structure. Interestingly, the hydrogels obtained from compounds P4 and P5 exhibit potential antimicrobial activity against Gram-positive bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis) and Gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia coli). Dose-dependent cell-viability studies using MTT assay (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) by taking human lung carcinoma (A549) cells vividly demonstrates the noncytotoxic nature of these gelator molecules in vitro. Hemolytic studies show nonsignificant or little hemolysis of human erythrocyte cells at the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of these tested bacteria. Interestingly, it has been found that these antibacterial noncytotoxic hydrogels exhibit proteolytic resistance toward the enzymes proteinase K and chymotrypsin. Moreover, the gel strength and gel recovery time have been successfully modulated by varying the alkyl chain length of the N-terminally located amino acid residues. Similarly, the thermal stability of these hydrogels has been nicely tuned by altering the alkyl chain length of the N-terminally located amino acid residues. In the era of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria, the discovery of this new class of peptide-based antibacterial, proteolytically stable, injectable, and noncytotoxic soft materials holds future promise for the development of new antibiotics.