CONTEXT: Antibiotic resistance to uropathogens has grown significantly worldwide. Today, pediatric urologist experience a situation that needs appropriate action because urinary tract infections are one of the most common bacterial infections in children. OBJECTIVE: In this overview we aimed at presenting the clinical aspects of antibiotic usage in pediatric urology. Our intention was to take part of the important debate regarding future management of bacterial resistance against antibiotics. EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: We searched PubMed for the terms: [UTI in children], [Recurrent UTI in children], and [Antibiotic resistance in UTI]. When using these terms, we found a numerous amount (3875) of published clinical articles related to the topic. By means of an overview, we chose not to focus on a specific condition but to an overall understanding of the problems related to pediatric urology in general. EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: We found that usage of antibiotics has had an unquestionable benefit to reduce the morbidity and mortality related to urinary tract infections in childhood. However, recent studies suggest that early exposure to antibiotics in childhood might have negative systemic effects related to neurocognitive function, body metabolism, and fat distribution. In addition to increased resistance to common antimicrobial agents, it has resulted in increased costs and inadequate effect in severe infections. This calls for changes in the clinical management of urinary pathogens in pediatric urology. CONCLUSIONS: As the prevalence of antibiotic resistance grows, pediatric urologists have a key role in managing its consequences and its prevention. PATIENT SUMMARY: In this overview we looked at the consequences of antibiotic usage treating urinary tract infections in childhood. We found that the prevalence of antibiotic resistance has grown. We concluded that decision-makers must know about the short- and long-term effects of antibiotic usage in children. When we understand the development of antibiotic resistance better, we can build up prevention strategies.