BACKGROUND: Escherichia coli is one of the most common pathogenic bacteria, which cause urinary tract infections in infants as well as in adult human beings. Due to the emergence of antibiotic resistance in E. coli, there is a great demand of new antimicrobial agent for the treatment of infections caused by such E. coli. This study aims to isolate, identify and characterize the native soil-bacterial strains predominate in the soil of Unaizah city, which produce antimicrobial agent antagonistic to E. coli ATCC 10536, followed by isolation, purification and characterization of antimicrobial agent. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pour plate, spread plate and 16S rRNA sequence analysis methods were followed for the isolation and identification of soil bacteria. Ammonium sulphate and dialysis (MWCO-8 KD) methods were followed for the isolation and partial purification of antimicrobial agent from the cell free broths. The characterization of antimicrobial agent was carried out by determining the minimum inhibitory concentration and effects of temperature and pH on the antimicrobial stability. RESULTS: Out of the twenty five soil samples, only one soil-bacterial strain was found to produce antimicrobial agent antagonistic to E. coli ATCC 10536. The isolated soil bacterium was identified as Bacillus pumilus SAFR-032. The soil isolate was characterized and results suggest that 30 degrees C temperature and pH 7.0 were the optimum growth parameters and soybean casein digest broth was the best fermentation medium, whereas the highest production of antimicrobial agent was at 35 degrees C temperature, pH 7.0, shaking at 150-220 rpm and at 60th h of incubation. The maximum yield of antimicrobial agent was obtained at 60% of (NH 4) 2SO 4. The results of characterization of antimicrobial agent suggest that the maximum and minimum antimicrobial activities were at pH 3.0 and 8.0, respectively, whereas antimicrobial activity was unaffected by temperature. The antimicrobial agent was highly stable at varying range of temperature 50-120 degrees C. Minimum inhibitory concentration of antimicrobial agent was found to be 64 mug mL -1. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, this study might be a great endeavor for the healthcare industry in order to treatment of different infections caused by E. coli and that warrants further investigations to fully standardized and establish the antimicrobial profile of effect(s) of this isolate.