Enterococcal strains recovered from fecal samples of captive blue-fronted parrots (Amazona aestiva) assisted at two wild animal screening centers in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, were identified as Enterococcus hirae (the predominant species; 75.3%), followed by Enterococcus faecalis (17.3%), Enterococcus casseliflavus (4.8%), Enterococcus gallinarum (1.7%), and Enterococcus hermanniensis (0.9%). All strains were susceptible to linezolid and teicoplanin. Rates of nonsusceptibility (including resistant and intermediate categories) to other 16 antimicrobials tested varied from 69.3% to 0.4%, A considerable proportion (48.0%) of the strains was multidrug-resistant and diverse genetic determinants associated with antimicrobial resistance were identified. Tetracycline-resistant strains carried the tet(M) and/or tet(L) genes. Macrolides resistance was associated with the erm(B), erm(A) and mefA genes, while 43.2% of the isolates were negative for the investigated genes. High-level resistance to gentamicin associated with the aac(6')-le-aph(2'')-la gene was detected in one E. faecalis strain. The two strains presenting high-level resistance to streptomycin were negative for the ant(6')-Ia, ant(3')-Ia, ant(9')-Ia and ant(9')-Ib genes. The vat(D) gene was found in all the 47 quinupristin/dalfopristin resistant strains identified as non-E. faecalis. Analysis of PFGE profiles of E. hirae strains after restriction with SmaI demonstrated the occurrence of five clonal groups. The predominant E. hirae clone was distributed among birds in the two institutions, suggesting that this clone was well adapted to the host and environments investigated. The four clonal groups identified among E. faecalis were composed by small numbers of strains and, generally, restricted to birds in the same sector. The occurrence of enterococcal strains exhibiting antimicrobial resistance traits and carrying genetic determinants that represent potential threats to the health of both humans and animals, in the intestinal microbiota of A. aestiva, highlights the need for additional monitoring studies to elucidate the population structure and the dynamics of transmission of these microorganisms among animals, humans and the environment.