INTRODUCTION: Burkholderia cepacia (B. cepacia) complex is composed of 20 phylogenetically closely related bacterial species. Some species have emerged as opportunistic pathogens in immunocompromised patients and are responsible for nosocomial outbreaks. The B. cepacia complex is a recognized respiratory pathogen in patients with cystic fibrosis. Burkholderia cenocepacia and Burkholderia multivorans (B. multivorans) are the most prevalent species in the world, according to the literature. However, research groups in Argentina have described a particular local epidemiology, with prevalence of Burkholderia contaminans (B. contaminans). METHODS: A total of 68 isolates of B. cepacia complex recovered of 46 cystic fibrosis patients attended at 14 hospitals distributed in 9 provinces of the country were studied. Identification was carried out by conventional phenotypic methods and was confirmed by recA gene sequencing. Sequences were analysed using the BLASTN program and comparing with B. cepacia complex type strains sequences deposited in GenBank. Antibiotic susceptibility tests were performed on isolates of the most prevalent species according to CLSI M45 guidelines. RESULTS: The prevalent specie was B. contaminans (49%, n = 33) followed by B. cenocepacia (25%; n = 17). The remaining species were Burkholderia seminalis (B. seminalis) (7%, n = 5), B. cepacia (7%, n = 5), B. multivorans (6%, n = 4), Burkholderia vietnamensis (5%, n=3) and Burkholderia pyrrocinia (1%; n = 1). The 46% of B. contaminans isolates were resistant to SXT and 76% sensitive to MIN, MEM and CAZ. The isolates of B. cenocepacia were 100% resistant to SXT and MIN and 47% to CAZ and MEM. B. seminalis showed high levels of resistance to TMS (80%), CAZ (60%) and MIN (60%), and 60% of the isolates showed intermediate sensitivity to MEM. CONCLUSION: Previous reports have described the prevalence of B. contaminans isolation from cystic fibrosis patients in Argentina, Spain and Portugal, and a case of two patients with cystic fibrosis in Ireland has recently been reported. Due to the high frequency with which B. contaminans is isolated in our country, it is necessary to promote the investigation of possible sources of infection and to understand the factors and mechanisms involved in the apparent greater transmissibility of this species. Different antimicrobial resistance profiles were detected between the species.