The present study evaluated the microbiological properties of three probiotic candidate strains of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) (128; 131; CE11_2), their effect on intestinal epithelial permeability, and their ability to reduce intestinal colonization of Salmonella Typhimurium (ST) individually or as a batch culture in neonatal turkey poults. Isolates were characterized morphologically and identified using 16S rRNA sequence analyses. Each isolate was evaluated for tolerance and resistance to acidic pH, high osmotic NaCl concentrations, and bile salts in broth medium. In vitro assessment of antimicrobial activity against different enteropathogenic bacteria was determined using an overlay technique. In vitro intestinal permeability was evaluated using a stressed Caco-2 cell culture assay treated with/without the probiotic candidates. The in vivo effect of the selected LAB strains on ST cecal colonization was determined in two independent trials with neonatal turkey poults. The results obtained in this study demonstrate the tolerance of LAB candidates to pH 3, a NaCl concentration of 6.5%, and high bile salts (0.6%). All strains evaluated exhibited in vitro antibacterial activity against Salmonella Enteritidis, ST, and Campylobacter jejuni. Candidates 128 and 131 exhibited a coccus morphology and were identified as Enterococcus faecium, and bacterial strain CE11_2 exhibited clusters of cocci-shaped cells and was identified as Pediococcus parvulus. All three candidate probiotics significantly (P < 0.05) increased transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) in Caco-2 cells following a 3-h incubation period with hydrogen peroxide compared to control and blank groups. The combination of all three candidates as a batch culture exhibited significant efficacy in controlling intestinal colonization of ST in neonatal turkey poults. Evaluation of the combination of these selected LAB strains according to performance and intestinal health parameters of chickens and turkeys are currently in process.