BACKGROUND: In a previous study, it was demonstrated that ProHeart((R)) 6 (PH6) (moxidectin, Zoetis) provided only about 20% efficacy in a small six-dog study against a macrocyclic lactone -resistant Dirofilaria immitis isolate (Jd2009-2) when dogs were inoculated with infective third-stage larvae (L3) at the end of the dosing period (ie, 180 days post treatment). The objective of the current study was to determine the prophylactic efficacy of a moxidectin sustained-release formulation (PH6) against a confirmed macrocyclic lactone-resistant isolate of D. immitis (JYD-34) in dogs when administered by subcutaneous injection at the labeled dose of 0.17 mg/kg 2 days before L3 inoculation. This was intended to model the scenario where dogs become infected with resistant heartworms at the end of the PH6 treatment period (ie, 6 months post treatment) when dogs would routinely be given another injection under normal field use. METHODS: Twelve purpose-bred Beagle dogs (six males and six females) were selected and randomly allocated to two groups, untreated controls and PH6-treated dogs in groups of six each. The dogs were >/=8 months old at the start of the study, and using blood samples collected on Day -7 were shown to be negative for adult heartworm antigen and microfilariae. On Day 0, the dogs in the untreated control group were administered saline subcutaneously by injection, and the dogs in the treated group were administered PH6 according to label instructions. On Day 2, each dog was inoculated in the inguinal area with 50 L3 of D. immitis. The dogs were necropsied on Day 150 (148 days post infection), and the worms were collected and counted. RESULTS: All of the six control dogs were infected and harbored a range of 21 to 37 worms (geometric mean, 25.4; 10.9 males and 13.9 females). Only one of the six PH6 dogs was found to be infected, harboring a single male worm. Efficacy was 99.5% (geometric mean). CONCLUSION: ProHeart((R)) 6 was highly effective in preventing the development of heartworms in dogs challenged with a confirmed macrocyclic lactone-resistant heartworm isolate (JYD-34) 2 days prior to treatment.