Objective: To retrospectively analyze the antimicrobial resistance phenotype and molecular typing characteristics of Salmonella (S.) typhi and S. paratyphi in Jiangsu province from 2012 to 2015. Methods: The samples were collected from typhoid and paratyphoid patients in Jiangsu province. The biochemical identification and serotyping were carried out after isolation and culture. Kirby-Bauer (K-B) testing was used to detect the drug susceptibility of the strains. The molecular typing characteristics of S. typhi and S. paratyphi were analyzed by pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Results: The resistant rates of 134 S. typhi and S. paratyphi A strains to nalidixic acid were highest (61.2% and 86.7%), while the resistant rates to remaining antibiotics were less than 15.0%. Most of S. typhi and S. paratyphi A strains were resistant to only one antibiotic. Multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains of S. typhi and S. paratyphi A accounted for 2.6% and 13.3% respectively. The composition of the all-sensitive strains of S. typhi increased by 44.3% in 2015, at the same time, there were also MDR S. paratyphi A strains, which were resistant to 5 and 6 antibiotics. S. paratyphi A could be divided into eight molecular patterns by PFGE, showing that the similarity between the MDR strains and other strains was relatively low. The S. paratyphi A strains with same pattern were resistant to same antibiotics. S. typhi could be divided into 68 molecular patterns by PFGE, with large variability between different patterns. There was no corresponding relationship between the patterns and the drug resistance characteristics. Conclusions: The overall antibiotic resistance of S. typhi and S. paratyphi A strains showed a decreasing trend, but the number of antibiotics to which they were resistant increased. PFGE patterns of S. typhi showed diversity without correspondence to antibiotic characteristics. PFGE patterns of S. paratyphi A were less with correspondence to antibiotic characteristics. We should pay more attention to key patterns in key areas.