Background: Campylobacter is considered to be the leading cause of human bacterial gastroenteritis, of which poultry is the main reservoir. Campylobacter contaminated chicken products are a major cause of human Campylobacter infection. In this study, the prevalence of Campylobacter in chicken in central China was investigated, and the genotypic diversity, antimicrobial resistance and biofilm of these isolates were characterized. Results: A total of 206 Campylobacter isolates, including 166 C. jejuni and 40 C. coli, were isolated from chicken farms and live poultry markets in central China. Multilocus sequence typing and phylogenetic analysis showed that the Campylobacter isolates had diverse genetic backgrounds, which covered most of the dominant clone complexes (CCs) reported throughout China. The most prevalent CCs were CC-464, CC-1150, CC-353, and CC-828. All the isolates showed resistance to norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin and Cefazolin, and a prevalent resistance to fluoroquinolones, beta-lactams and tetracyclines was also observed. Among all the isolates, 133 strains showed the ability to form biofilm, thereinto, the isolates in two genetic branches, mainly including CC-21, CC-48, CC-677 and CC-45, showed a significantly lower ability to form biofilm than other genetic branches (p < 0.05). However, in general, the ability to form biofilm varied among different genetic branches, suggesting a complex genetic background to biofilm formation, but not only the genetic lineages. Compared with the strains unable to form biofilm, biofilm-producing strains possessed a significantly higher resistance to ampicillin, neomycin, sulfamethoxazole, amikacin, clindamycin and erythromycin (p < 0.05). Conclusions: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on the relationship of the genotypic diversity, antimicrobial resistance and biofilm-forming abilities of Campylobacter isolated from chicken in Central China, which showed the potential importance of biofilm in antimicrobial resistance. This study will help us better understand the epidemiology and antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter.