Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus are naturally occurring estuarine bacteria and are the leading causes of seafood-associated infections and mortality in the United States. Though multiple-antibiotic-resistant V. parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus strains have been reported, resistance patterns in vibrios are not as well documented as those of other foodborne bacterial pathogens. Salinity relaying (SR) is a postharvest processing (PHP) treatment to reduce the abundances of these pathogens in shellfish harvested during the warmer months. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the antimicrobial susceptibility (AMS), pathogenicity, and genetic profiles of V. parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus recovered from oysters during an oyster relay study. Isolates (V. parahaemolyticus [n = 296] and V. vulnificus [n = 94]) were recovered from oysters before and during the 21-day relaying study to detect virulence genes (tdh and trh) and genes correlated with virulence (vcgC) using multiplex quantitative PCR (qPCR). AMS to 20 different antibiotics was investigated using microbroth dilution, and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was used to study the genetic profiles of the isolates. Twenty percent of V. vulnificus isolates were vcgC(+), while 1 and 2% of V. parahaemolyticus were tdh(+) and trh(+), respectively. More than 77% of the V. vulnificus isolates and 30% of the V. parahaemolyticus isolates were resistant to at least one antimicrobial. Forty-eight percent of V. vulnificus and 8% of V. parahaemolyticus isolates were resistant to two or more antimicrobials. All isolates demonstrated a high genetic diversity, even among those isolated from the same site and having a similar AMS profile. No significant effects of the relaying process on AMS, virulence genes, or PFGE profiles of V. vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus were observed.IMPORTANCE Analysis of the antibiotic resistance profiles of V. vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus isolated from oysters during this study indicated that more than 48% of V. vulnificus isolates were resistant to two or more antimicrobials, including those recommended by the CDC for treating Vibrio infections. Also, the V. parahaemolyticus isolates showed high MICs for some of the Vibrio infection treatment antibiotics. Monitoring of AMS profiles of this bacterium is important to ensure optimal treatment of infections and improve food safety. Our study showed no significant differences in the AMS profiles of V. vulnificus (P = 0.26) and V. parahaemolyticus (P = 0.23) isolated from the oysters collected before versus after relaying. This suggests that the salinity of the relaying sites did not affect the AMS profiles of the Vibrio isolates, although it did reduce the numbers of these bacteria in oysters (S. Parveen et al., J Food Sci 82:484-491, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-3841.13584).