Background: Children undergoing CIC frequently have positive urine culture results and receive many antimicrobial agents. Subsequently, this population is at high risk for infections caused by antimicrobial-resistant bacteria. Resistant pathogens, such as vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE), carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), and organisms that produce extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs), which are third-generation cephalosporin resistant (3GCR), are of particular concern. Methods: In this retrospective study, all urine culture results and antimicrobial-susceptibility testing results were obtained between January 2008 and December 2014 from the electronic health record of children </=18 years of age who were undergoing CIC (n = 14 832). Isolates were identified as VRE, CRE, or 3GCR. Organisms of the same type that were obtained in the same year and with identical antibiotic susceptibilities from the same patient were excluded. Simple linear regression was used to determine the association between year and rates of resistance. Results: A total of 3997 positive culture results were included in this analysis. Of all Enterococcus isolates for which susceptibility results were available, 4.6% were VRE, 11.1% of all isolates that belonged to the Enterobacteriaceae family were 3GCR, and 0.4% of eligible isolates were CRE. There were significantly higher rates of resistance to third-generation cephalosporins and CRE in 2014 than in 2008 (P < .01). Simple linear regression revealed a significant association between year and rate for resistance to third-generation cephalosporins but not for CRE or VRE. The rate of increase in resistance to third-generation cephalosporins in patients who required CIC was higher than that in patients who did not need CIC. Conclusions: The rate of resistance to third-generation cephalosporins has increased significantly in the past 7 years in children undergoing CIC, which indicates that careful monitoring is warranted for continued increases in antimicrobial-resistant organisms in this unique patient population.