BACKGROUND: In the eighties, a multidrug resistant clone of Salmonella Typhimurium DT104 emerged in UK and disseminated worldwide. This clone harbored a Salmonella genomic island 1 (SGI1) that consists of a backbone and a multidrug resistant region encoding for penta-resistance (ampicillin, chloramphenicol/florfenicol, streptomycin/spectinomycin, sulphonamides and tetracycline (ACSSuT)). Several authors suggested that SGI1 might have a potential role in enhancement of virulence properties of Salmonella enterica. The aim of this study was to investigate whether nontyphoidal S. enterica isolates carrying SGI1 cause more severe illness than SGI1 free ones in humans. METHODS: From 2011 to 2016, all patients infected with nontyphoidal S. enterica in our hospital were retrospectively included. All nontyphoidal S. enterica isolates preserved in our University Hospital (Dijon, France) were screened for the presence of SGI1. Clinical and biological data of patients were retrospectively collected to evaluate illness severity. Statistical analysis of data was performed by Kruskal-Wallis test or Fisher's exact test for univariate analysis, and by logistic regression for multivariate analysis. RESULTS: A total of 100 isolates of S. enterica (22 serovars) were collected. Twelve isolates (12%) belonging to 4 serovars harbored SGI1: S. Typhimurium, S. Infantis, S. Kentucky, S. St Paul. The severity of the disease was age-related (for invasive infection, sepsis and inflammatory response) and was associated with immunosuppression (for invasive infection, sepsis and bacteremia) but not with the presence of SGI1 or with antimicrobial resistance. CONCLUSION: A rather high proportion (12%) of human clinical isolates belonging to various serovars (for the first time serovar St Paul) and harboring various antimicrobial resistance profile carried SGI1. Diseases due to SGI1-positive S. enterica or to antimicrobial resistant isolates were not more severe than the others. This first clinical observation should be confirmed by a multicenter and prospective study.