Background: Gram-negative bacteria are becoming increasingly resistant to carbapenems and are related to the use of carbapenems. Thus, the main objective of this study was to compare the appropriateness of prescribing carbapenem before and after using an antimicrobial restriction system without infectious diseases consultation. Materials and methods: A retrospective cross-sectional before and after study was conducted in Lamphun Hospital to limit the prescription of carbapenems. Data were obtained by a review of the medical records and electronic databases from the period September 2014 to January 2015 (before) and from September 2015 to January 2016 (after). Results: A total of 360 antibacterial prescriptions were analyzed. The appropriateness of prescribing was higher after using the antimicrobial restriction (55.0%) than before using the antimicrobial restriction system (38.3%; p=0.001). The amount of carbapenem in the defined daily dose per 1,000 bed days increased by 3.48% after using the antimicrobial restriction system when compared with before using the antimicrobial restriction system, which was not statistically significant (p=0.611). The incidence rates of nosocomial infections caused by resistance of Enterobacteriaceae to ertapenem before and after the intervention to limit antimicrobial therapy was found to have decreased from 4.80 to 0.95 infections per 1,000 patient days, respectively (p=1.00). The expenditure for carbapenems in the average value of baht per patient was found to have decreased by 36.33% after using the antimicrobial restriction system when compared with before using the antimicrobial restriction system (p=0.001). Conclusion: These results suggest that antimicrobial restriction systems can increase the appropriateness of prescribing antibiotics. The expenditure for carbapenem was found to decrease after using the antimicrobial restriction system when compared with before using the antimicrobial restriction system, even without infectious diseases consultation. However, the amount of carbapenem in the defined daily dose per 1,000 bed days was not found to reduce after using the antimicrobial restriction system.