The synthesis of a fully degradable, bio-based, sustained release, pro-antimicrobial polymer network comprised of degradable acetals (PANDA) is reported. The active antimicrobial agent - p-anisaldehyde (pA) (an extract from star anise) - was converted into a UV curable acetal containing pro-antimicrobial monomer and subsequently photopolymerized into a homogenous thiol-ene network. Under neutral to acidic conditions (pH<8), the PANDAs undergo surface erosion and exhibit sustained release of pA over 38days. The release of pA from PANDAs was shown to be effective against both bacterial and fungal pathogens. From a combination of confocal microscopy and transmission electron microscopy, we observed that the released pA disrupts the cell membrane. Additionally, we demonstrated that PANDAs have minimal cytotoxicity towards both epithelial cells and macrophages. Although a model platform, these results point to promising pathways for the design of fully degradable sustained-release antimicrobial systems with potential applications in agriculture, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, household/personal care, and food industries. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: With the increasing number of patients prescribed immunosuppressants coupled with the rise in antibiotic resistance - life-threatening microbial infections are a looming global threat. With limited success within the antibiotic pipeline, nature-based essential oils (EOs) are being investigated for their multimodal effectiveness against microbes. Despite the promising potential of EOs, difficulties in their encapsulation, limited water solubility, and high volatility limit their use. Various studies have shown that covalent attachment of these EO derivatives to polymers can mitigate these limitations. The current study presents the synthesis of a fully-degradable, sustained release, cytocompatible, pro-antimicrobial acetal network derived from p-anisaldehyde. This polymer network design provides a pathway toward application-specific EO releasing materials with quantitative encapsulation efficiencies, sustained release, and broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity.