Salmonella is a predominant foodborne pathogen in the United States and other countries. Mobile genetic elements such as plasmids allow Salmonella to adapt to external stress factors such as nutrient deprivation and host factors. Incompatibility group I1 (IncI1) plasmid-carrying Salmonella enterica strains were examined to determine the presence of plasmid-associated genes and their influence on phenotypic characteristics. The objective of this study was to understand the genetic determinants on IncI1 plasmids and their impact on antimicrobial susceptibility, competitive growth inhibition of Escherichia coli, and plasmid transfer. Primers were designed for genes that play a role in virulence, antimicrobial resistance, and plasmid transfer based on previously sequenced IncI1 plasmids. Polymerase chain reaction assays were conducted on 92 incompatibility group I1 (IncI1)-positive S. enterica strains. Phenotypic characterization included conjugation assays, antimicrobial susceptibility testing, and bacteriocin production based on the inhibition of growth of colicin-negative E. coli J53. The antimicrobial resistance genes aadA1, tetA, sul1, and blaCMY were detected in 88%, 87%, 80%, and 48% of the strains, respectively. Over half of the strains were resistant or intermediately resistant to streptomycin (85%), sulfonamides (76%), tetracycline (74%), and ampicillin (68%) and 57% of the strains inhibited growth of E. coli J53 strain. Among putative virulence genes, colicin-associated colI and cib were detected in 23% and 35% of strains and imm and ccdA were present in 58% and 54% of strains, respectively. Approximately 61% of strains contained plasmids that conjugally transferred antimicrobial resistance, including 83% where the recipient received IncI1 plasmids. Most of the strains carried an assortment of transfer associated (pil and tra) genes with between 63% and 99% of strains being positive for individual genes. Taken together the study affirms that IncI1 plasmids likely play roles in the dissemination of antimicrobial resistance and virulence-associated factors among enteric organisms.