BACKGROUND: Transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy (TRUS-Bx) is typically considered a safe procedure. However, infectious complications have been increasing. OBJECTIVE: To determine the contemporary rate of biopsy-related infectious and noninfectious complications after TRUS-Bx, and identify potential risk factors associated with the complications. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a prospective multicenter study and a substudy of a trial investigating the role of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in prostate cancer diagnosis (multi-IMPROD, NCT02241122). INTERVENTION: TRUS-Bx was performed for all patients included in the study. Ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, or fosfomycin was administered for antibiotic prophylaxis. OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: On inclusion, patients completed a detailed questionnaire and underwent MRI scanning. Antibiotic prophylaxis was prospectively recorded. After collection of a rectal swab, TRUS-Bx (total of 14-18 biopsy cores) was performed and. The rectal swabs were cultured and the antimicrobial susceptibility profile of Escherichia coli strains was analyzed. Biopsy complications leading to a visit to a health care unit were recorded and potential risk factors for complications were analyzed. RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: Twelve of the 294 patients (4.1%) had a biopsy-related complication, of which two (0.7%) were infectious and managed in the outpatient setting. Some 11% of the patients had an E. coli strain resistant to the prophylactic antibiotic administered. CONCLUSIONS: The risk of an infectious or noninfectious complication after TRUS-Bx is very low, although the FQ resistance rate in the study population was significant. Accordingly, the present TRUS-Bx procedure and antibiotic prophylaxis are efficient in guarding against biopsy complications, but regional resistance rates may affect the generalizability of the results. PATIENT SUMMARY: We examined the rate of complications after prostate biopsies in 294 patients. The risk of having a biopsy-related complication was low (4.1%). The rate of infectious complications was reasonably low (0.7%) although antibiotic resistance to the prophylactic antibiotic regimen was significant (11%).