VetPath is an ongoing pan-European antimicrobial susceptibility monitoring programme collecting pathogens from diseased cattle, pigs and poultry not recently treated with antibiotics. Non-duplicate milk samples were collected from cows with acute clinical mastitis in nine countries and 934 isolates were obtained during 2009-2012 for subsequent antimicrobial susceptibility testing in a central laboratory. CLSI broth microdilution methodology was used, and where available, MICs were interpreted using CLSI approved veterinary-specific (ceftiofur) otherwise human clinical breakpoints. Among Escherichia coli (n=207) and Klebsiella spp., (n=87), resistance was moderate to tetracycline and high to cephapirin (E. coli only) whereas resistance to other beta-lactam antibiotics was very low (ceftiofur) to low (amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, cephalexin, cephalonium). The MIC90 of enrofloxacin and marbofloxacin was 0.03 and 0.06mug/mL respectively (E. coli) with 0.5% strains displaying higher MICs. Staphylococcus aureus (n=192) and coagulase-negative staphylococci (CNS; n=165) strains were susceptible to most antibiotics tested except to penicillin (25.0 and 29.1% resistance), respectively. Three S. aureus and seven CNS strains were oxacillin-resistant and harboured mecA. Streptococcus uberis strains (n=188) were susceptible to the beta-lactam antibiotics although 35.6% were penicillin intermediately susceptible, and 20.2% were resistant to erythromycin, 36.7% to tetracycline. For Streptococcus dysgalactiae (n=95) the latter figures were 13.7 and 56.8%, respectively. For most antibiotics, the percentage resistance among E. coli, S. aureus and S. uberis was comparable to that of the VetPath 2002-2006 survey. This current, expanded VetPath study shows that mastitis pathogens were susceptible to most antibiotics with exceptions of staphylococci tested against penicillin and streptococci against erythromycin or tetracycline. This work highlights the high need to set additional clinical breakpoints for antibiotics frequently used to treat mastitis.