BACKGROUND: Biofilm forming drug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa are responsible for major death in burn center of different hospitals across the globe. OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were to evaluate the effect of nano-silver (Ag), nano-copper (Cu), and two hospital disinfectants (deconex and benzalkonium chloride) on biofilm formation and expression of transcription regulatory quorum sensing gene rh1R in P. aeruginosa burn isolates. METHODS: 28 multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa (MDRPA) strains were isolated from patients hospitalized in the burn center of a referral hospital in Kerman, Iran. Sizes and purities of nanoparticles were checked by TEM and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The Minimal Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) and Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) of the nanoparticles (NPs), deconex and benzalkonium chloride were determined by broth microdilution method. Antibiofilm activities of these compounds were measured by microtiter assay. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used for detection of qacEDelta1, cepA, copA and rhlR genes. Quantification of rhlR gene expression in presence and absence of the above compounds was carried out by relative quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). RESULTS: Benzalkonium chloride had a potent antimicrobial activity and inhibited growth of all the isolates at MIC 0.06+/-0.2mg/mL, while nano-Ag was effective at MIC 20+/-0.2mg/mL. Furthermore, 28.5% of the isolates showed strong, 25% moderate, 14% weak and 32% demonstrated no biofilm activity. Ag NPs exerted highest antibiofilm activity, follow by deconex and benzalkonium chloride. The qacEDelta1 was absent in this study, whereas 17.8% and 60.8% of the isolates were positive for cepA and copA genes. Benzalkonium chloride, Ag NPs and deconex increased the expression of rhlR gene 64, 2 and 7 folds, respectively. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that, there is direct relationship between decrease in antibiofilm activity and increase in expression of the rhlR gene in the presence of benzalkonium chloride. Absence of qacEDelta1 gene may be contributed in sensitivity of the isolates to the above agents.