BACKGROUND: Microbiologic studies suggest that complicated (CAA) and uncomplicated (UAA) acute appendicitis are different entities. Routine peritoneal fluid cultures continue to be controversially related to a low positive rate, found mainly in UAA; to isolation of typical micro-organisms with expected susceptibilities; and to a community-acquired intra-abdominal infection. The aim of this study was to describe microbiologic isolates in CAA and UAA and the usefulness of peritoneal fluid cultures to determine the susceptibilities to our antibiotic therapy guidelines. METHODS: This study was a retrospective review of a prospective database collected at University San Juan Hospital (Spain) between June 2014 and June 2017. Complicated acute appendicitis was defined as gangrenous or perforated, whereas UAA was defined as phegmonous or suppurative. Our antibiotic recommendations are amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and in patients with beta-lactam allergies, metronidazole plus aztreonam, and an aminoglycoside (gentamicin or tobramycin). Microbiologic cultures were performed in 264 patients, 157 with a CAA and 107 with a UAA. RESULTS: The positive culture rate was significantly higher in CAA (59%) than in UAA (24.3%). Gram-positive cocci (51.6% CAA; 23.1% UAA), including Streptococcus constellatus (29% CAA; 3.8% UAA), and anaerobes (67.7% CAA; 42.3% UAA) were significantly more common in CAA. The rates of antibiotic resistance were amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 14% (17.2% CAA; 3.8% UAA), gentamicin or tobramycin 8.4% (9.7% CAA; 3.8% UAA), ciprofloxacin 5.9% (6.5% CAA; 3.8% UAA), and ertapenem 10.9% (14% CAA; 0 UAA). CONCLUSIONS: The culture-positive rate was higher in CAA, with different isolates and susceptibilities than in UAA, identifying a higher frequency of gram-positive cocci (including S. constellatus) and anaerobes. We recommend obtaining peritoneal fluid cultures in CAA, which frequently will lead to a change in the antimicrobial drug therapy guidelines, creating specific recommendations in AA.