Peptidoglycan hydrolases (PGHs) have been suggested as novel therapeutics for the treatment of bovine mastitis. However, activity in the presence of cow's milk is an important requirement for drugs administered into the bovine udder. We have used a microtiter plate-based protocol to screen a library of >170 recombinant PGHs, including engineered bacteriophage endolysins, for enzymes with activity against Staphylococcus aureus in milk. Eight suitable PGH constructs were identified by this approach, and their efficacies against S. aureus in heat-treated milk were compared by time-kill assays. The two most active enzymes (lysostaphin and CHAPK_CWT-LST) reduced S. aureus numbers in milk to undetectable levels within minutes at nanomolar concentrations. Due to their different peptidoglycan cleavage sites, these PGH constructs revealed synergistic activity, as demonstrated by checkerboard assays, spot assays, and time-kill experiments. Furthermore, they proved active against a selection of staphylococcal mastitis isolates from different geographical regions when applied individually or in synergistic combination. The PGH combination completely eradicated S. aureus from milk: no more bacteria were detected within 24 h after the addition of the enzymes, corresponding to a reduction of >9 log units from the level in the control. Efficacy was also retained at different inoculum levels (3 log versus 6 log CFU/ml) and when S. aureus was grown in milk as opposed to broth prior to the experiments. In raw cow's milk, CHAPK_CWT-LST showed reduced efficacy, whereas lysostaphin retained its activity, reducing bacterial numbers by >3.5 log units within 3 h.IMPORTANCE Staphylococci, and S. aureus in particular, are a major cause of bovine mastitis, an inflammation of the mammary gland in cows that is associated with high costs and risks for consumers of milk products. S. aureus-induced mastitis, commonly treated by intramammary infusion of antibiotics, is characterized by low cure rates and increasing antibiotic resistance in bacteria. Therefore, alternative treatment options are highly desirable. PGHs, including bacteriophage endolysins, rapidly and specifically kill selected pathogens by degrading their cell walls and are refractory to resistance development; thus, they have promise as novel antibacterial agents. This study employed a screening approach to identify PGH constructs with high staphylolytic activity in cow's milk among a large collection of enzymes. Our results suggest that the most promising enzymes identified by this strategy hold potential as novel mastitis therapeutics and thus support their further characterization in animal models.