Campylobacter jejuni was longitudinally isolated from beef cattle housed in four confined feeding operations (CFOs) in southern Alberta over 18 months. All of the cattle were administered a variety of antimicrobial agents (AMAs) non-therapeutically and metaphylactically during their time in the CFOs. In total, 7966 C. jejuni isolates were recovered from cattle. More animals were colonized by the bacterium after >60 days in the CFO (i.e. interim) compared to individuals upon entry at the CFO (i.e. arrival). Subtyping and resistance to seven AMAs was determined for 1823 (22.9%) and 1648 (20.7%) isolates, respectively. Increases in the proportion of isolates resistant to tetracycline were observed at all four CFOs between sample times, and to ciprofloxacin and nalidixic acid at one or more CFOs. The vast majority of isolates resistant to tetracycline carried tetO, whereas ciprofloxacin resistance was predominantly attributed to mutations in the gyrA gene. Although considerable diversity was observed, a majority of C. jejuni isolates belonged to one of five predominant subtype clusters. There was no difference in subtype diversity, but the population structure differed between sample times. Selection for resistance to ciprofloxacin and nalidixic acid was subtype-dependent, whereas selection for resistance to tetracycline was not. Findings indicate that a proportion of cattle entering CFOs carry resistant C. jejuni subtypes, and the characteristics of beef cattle CFOs facilitate transmission/proliferation of diverse subtypes including those resistant to AMAs, which coupled with the densities of CFOs likely contributes to the high rates of cattle-associated campylobacteriosis in southern Alberta.IMPORTANCE A small proportion of cattle entering a CFO carry Campylobacter jejuni, including subtypes resistant to AMAs. The large numbers of cattle arriving from diverse locations at the CFOs and intermingling within the CFOs over time, coupled with the high density housing of animals, the high rates of transmission of C. jejuni subtypes amongst animals, and the extensive use of AMAs merge to create an ideal situation where the proliferation of diverse antimicrobial resistant C. jejuni subtypes is facilitated. Considering that southern Alberta reports high rates of campylobacteriosis in the human population and that many of these clinical cases are due to C. jejuni subtypes associated with cattle, it is likely that the characteristics of beef cattle CFOs favor propagation of clinically-relevant C. jejuni subtypes including those resistant to medically important AMAs, which constitutes a risk to human health.