This study was conducted to investigate the effects of methionine hydroxy analogue (MHA) on the physical barrier and immune defence in the gill of young grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). A total 630 young grass carp with an average initial weight of 259.70+/-0.47g were fed graded levels of MHA (0, 2.4, 4.4, 6.4, 8.5 and 10.5g/kg diet) and one DL-methionine (DLM) group (6.4g/kg diet) for 8 weeks. After feeding trial, 15 fish from each treatment were challenged with Flavobacterium columnare. Compared to the basal diet, optimal MHA improved cellular structure integrity of gill via repressing death receptor and mitochondria pathways induced apoptosis, which might be related to the down-regulation of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase mRNA levels (P<.05). Simultaneously, optimal MHA supplementation improved cellular structure integrity of gill via elevating glutathione contents, antioxidant enzymes activities and corresponding isoforms mRNA levels to attenuate oxidative damage, which might be to the up-regulation of NF-E2-related factor 2 mRNA levels and down-regulation of Kelch-like ECH-associating protein 1a mRNA levels (P<.05). Besides, optimal MHA improved intercellular structure integrity of immune organs via up-regulating the mRNA levels of intercellular tight junctions-related genes, which might be owing to the down-regulation of myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) mRNA levels (P<.05). Summarily, MHA could improve the physical barrier of fish gill. In addition, optimal MHA supplementation increased lysozyme (LZ) and acid phosphatase (ACP) activities, complement 3 (C3), C4 and immunoglobulin M contents and up-regulated mRNA levels of liver-expressed antimicrobial peptide 2, hepcidin and beta-defensin, suggesting that MHA could enhance antimicrobial ability of fish gill. Meanwhile, optimal MHA supplementation enhanced the immune defence of gill via down-regulating pro-inflammatory cytokines mRNA levels and up-regulated anti-inflammatory cytokines mRNA levels, which might be attributed to the down-regulation of nuclear factor kappaB p65, c-Rel, IkappaB kinase beta, p38 mitogen activated protein kinase, eIF4E-binding protein1 (4E-BP1) and 4E-BP2 mRNA levels and up-regulation of inhibitor of kappaBalpha, ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 and target of rapamycin mRNA levels (P<.05). In conclusion, the positive effect of MHA on gill health is associated with the improvement of the defence against apoptosis, antioxidant status, tight junctions and immune defence of fish gill. Meanwhile, MHA was superior to DLM on improving the physical barrier of fish gill. For the direction to healthy breeding of young grass carp, the optimal MHA supplementation levels on the premise of 4.01g/kg methionine basal were estimated by quadratic regression curve, such as 5.49, 6.17 and 6.02g/kg diet bases on the defence against gill-rot, malondialdehyde content and LZ activity in the gill, respectively.