Microbiological screening of tissue allografts is crucial to prevent the transmission of bacterial and fungal infections to transplant recipients. Klebsiella was the most prevalent and resistant contaminating microorganism observed in our setting in the Iranian Tissue Bank. This study was conducted to determine the presence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) genes, antimicrobial resistance patterns of Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates, and their clonal relationships in allograft materials. K. pneumoniae contaminating bone and other tissue allografts recovered from deceased donors were identified and ESBL isolates were detected using a phenotypic confirmatory method. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was carried out using the disk diffusion method. Distribution of ESBL genes and molecular typing were performed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Repetitive-element (rep-PCR) methods. Of 3828 donated tissues, 51 (1.3%) were found contaminated by K. pneumoniae isolates. Compared to tissue allografts from brain-dead, heart-beating tissue donors, allografts from donors with circulatory cessation were associated with a higher risk of K. pneumoniae contamination [odds ratio (OR), 1.2 (CI 95% 0.9-2.3) (P value < 0.001)]. Half of the isolates produced ESBL, and the rate of susceptibility to cephalosporins was 51%. Among isolates, 22 (43.1%) harbored CTX-M, 31 (60.8%) SHV, and 9 (17.6%) harbored TEM types. The rep-dendrogram indicated that clones having identical or related strains with a similar antibiotype were isolated in the same period. This study provides evidence that a single clone of K. pneumoniae contaminated tissue allografts recovered from many different donors. A single clone found on tissues from several donors suggests contamination of tissues from a single source such as the tissue recovery process and environment. Genomic DNA testing and clonality of contaminating bacteria using molecular methods can focus the epidemiologic investigation on the tissue allograft recovery process including a search for contamination of the tissue recovery room environment, recovery staff, recovery equipment, reagents, solutions and supplies.