OBJECTIVES: Pseudomonas aeruginosa producing extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESbetaL) enzyme had the ability for antimicrobial resistance mechanisms and its multidrug-resistant (MDR) phenotype, has been increasingly reported as a major clinical concern worldwide. The aim of this study was to (i) characterize ESbetaL-producing MDR P. aeruginosa isolated from burn wound infections phenotypically and molecularly, (ii) evaluate the antibacterial activity of some essential oils (EOs) against selected ESbetaL-producing drug resistant P. aeruginosa and (iii) characterize a promising EO. METHODS: Identification and antibiotic susceptibility tests were performed for all isolates. ESbetaL production was detected phenotypically by an initial screening test (IST) and a phenotypic confirmatory test (PCT). Additionally, ESbetaL-producing isolates were also characterized molecularly. The antibacterial activity was detected using a disc diffusion method. Mechanisms of antibacterial action, the fatty acid profile, and functional groups characterization of the promising EO were analyzed using scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM & TEM), gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, respectively. RESULTS: A total of 50 non duplicated P. aeruginosa isolates from the wound samples of burn patients were identified. Of these, MDR and pan-drug resistance (PDR) showed a high prevalence in 38 (76%) isolates obtained from 10 clusters, while 21 (42%) were identified as ESbetaL-producing MDR or PDR P. aeruginosa isolates. Phenotypic detection of ESbetaL production showed that 20% were considered positive ESbetaL-producing P. aeruginosa using the IST, and were increased to 56% by the PCT. The most prevalent ESbetaL-encoding gene was blaOXA-2 (60.7%), followed by blaIMP-7 (53.6%) and blaOXA-50 (42.8%). Ginger oil is the most efficient antibacterial agent and its antibacterial action mechanism is attributed to the morphological changes in bacterial cells. The oil characterization revealed that 9,12-Octadecadienoic acid methyl ester is the major fatty acid (50.49%) identified. CONCLUSION: The high incidence of drug-resistance in ESbetaL-producing P. aeruginosa isolated from burn wounds is alarming. As proven in vitro, EOs may represent promising natural alternatives against ESbetaL-producing PDR or MDR P. aeruginosa isolates.