AIMS: Aeromonas hydrophila has been isolated from various fish species in Egypt and is known to carry virulence and antimicrobial resistance genes, which pose a risk for public health. The aim of the present study is to report, for the first time, the infection of mullet (Mugil cephalus) with A. hydrophila and to clarify the potential association between antimicrobial resistance and virulence traits encoded in A. hydrophila. METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, the occurrence of A. hydrophila in marketed mullet and the antimicrobial resistance phenotypes of these isolates were determined. Aeromonas hydrophila isolates were screened for the presence of virulence and beta-lactam resistance genes; the correlation between both gene groups was also investigated. The infection rate of examined mullet with A. hydrophila was 37% (50/135). The highest antimicrobial resistance was detected to cefoxitin (100%), followed by ampicillin (84%), ceftazidime (56%) and cefotaxime (40%). Only 4% of the isolates were resistant to erythromycin; 6% were resistant to both gentamicin and kanamycin with no resistance to ciprofloxacin. Variable frequencies of virulence and beta-lactam resistance genes were evident from PCR, where aerA and blaTEM predominated. The study also indicated a general weak positive correlation (R = 0.3) between both virulence and beta-lactam resistance genes. Some of the studied virulence genes (e.g. aerA:hlyA and hlyA:ast) were found to correlate positively. CONCLUSIONS: The presence of virulence and resistance genes in A. hydrophila from food sources poses a serious threat to public health. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing the occurrence of A. hydrophila in mullet and highlighting the coexistence of virulence and beta-lactam resistance genes encoded by these bacteria. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: These data provide insights into the potential association of antimicrobial resistance and virulence genes in A. hydrophila from marketed mullet in Egypt, which could pose threats to humans even if a weak positive correlation exists between both genes.