To assess phenotypic bacterial antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in different strata (e.g., host populations, environmental areas, manure, or sewage-effluents) for epidemiological purposes, isolates of target bacteria can be obtained from a stratum using various sample-types. Also, different sample-processing methods can be applied. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of each target antimicrobial drug for each isolate is measured. Statistical-equivalence testing of the MIC data for the isolates allows evaluating whether different sample-types or sample-processing methods yield equivalent estimates of the bacterial antimicrobial-susceptibility in the stratum. We demonstrate this approach on the antimicrobial-susceptibility estimates for (1) nontyphoidal Salmonella spp. from ground or trimmed meat vs. cecal-contents samples of cattle in processing plants in 2013-2014 and (2) nontyphoidal Salmonella spp. from urine, fecal, and blood human samples in 2015 (U.S. National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System data). We find the sample-types for cattle yield non-equivalent susceptibility estimates for several antimicrobial drug classes and thus may gauge distinct Salmonellae sub-populations. The quinolone and fluoroquinolone susceptibility estimates for nontyphoidal Salmonellae from human blood are non-equivalent to those from urine or feces, conjecturally due to the fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin) use to treat nontyphoidal Salmonellae infections. We also demonstrate statistical-equivalence testing for comparing sample-processing methods for fecal samples (culturing one vs. multiple aliquots per sample) to assess AMR in fecal Escherichia coli These methods yield equivalent results, except for tetracyclines. Importantly, statistical-equivalence testing provides the MIC difference at which the data from two sample-types or sample-processing methods differ statistically. Data-users (e.g., microbiologists, epidemiologists) may then interpret practical relevance of the difference.Importance Bacterial antimicrobial resistance (AMR) needs to be assessed in different populations or strata for the purposes of surveillance and determining the efficacy of interventions to halt AMR dissemination. To assess phenotypic antimicrobial-susceptibility, isolates of target bacteria can be obtained from a stratum using different sample-types or employing different sample-processing methods in the laboratory. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of each target antimicrobial drug for each of the isolates is measured, yielding the MIC distribution across the isolates from each sample-type or sample-processing method. We describe statistical-equivalence testing for the MIC data for evaluating whether two sample-types or sample-processing methods yield equivalent estimates of the bacterial phenotypic antimicrobial-susceptibility in the stratum. This includes estimating the MIC difference at which the data from the two approaches differ statistically. Data-users (e.g., microbiologists, epidemiologists, public health professionals) can then interpret whether that present difference is practically relevant.