The European Antimicrobial Susceptibility Surveillance in Animals (EASSA) program collects zoonotic and commensal bacteria from food-producing animals at slaughter and tracks their susceptibility to medically important antibiotics. Results of commensal enterococci species (2013-2014) are presented here. Intestinal content from cattle, pigs and chickens were randomly sampled (5-6 countries/host; >/=4 abattoirs/country; 1 sample/animal/farm) for isolation of enterococci, MICs of 9 antibiotics were assessed by CLSI agar dilution in a central laboratory. Clinical breakpoints (CLSI) and epidemiological cut-off values (EUCAST) were applied for data interpretation. In total 960 Enterococcus faecium and 779 Enterococcus faecalis strains were recovered. Seven porcine E. faecium/faecalis strains of Spanish origin were resistant to linezolid. One avian E. faecalis and one porcine E. faecium strain were non-wild type (MICs 8mg/L) to daptomycin. Clinical vancomycin resistance was absent; 2 poultry E. faecium and 1 bovine E. faecalis strains were non-wild type, all with MICs of 8mg/L. None of the strains tested were clinically resistant to tigecycline. Little clinical resistance to ampicillin or gentamicin was observed. Clinical resistance of E. faecium to quinupristin/dalfopristin was slightly higher (2.2-12.0%) but 61.9-83.2% of the strains were classified as non-wild type. Very high percentages resistance to tetracycline (67.4-78.3%) and to erythromycin (27.1-57.0%) were noted for both E. faecium and E. faecalis in pigs and chickens compared to cattle (5.2-30.4 and 9.0-10.4%, respectively). Similar non-wild type results were observed for E. hirae (n=557), E. durans (n=218) and E. casseliflavus (n=55) including percentage non-wild type for daptomycin, linezolid, tigecycline being absent and for vancomycin low. For these species percentage non-wild type to erythromycin was lower as compared to E. faecalis/faecium. This pan-EU survey shows high variability in antibiotic susceptibility of commensal enterococci from healthy food animals. Clinical resistance to critically important antibiotics for human medicine was absent or low, except for erythromycin.