Emergence and dissemination of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in food-borne bacteria is a public health issue. Retail meat is considered an important carrier for antimicrobial-resistant Escherichia coli. Currently, resistance of E. coli strains to third generation cephalosporins are of particular concern, with significant potential animal and public health consequences. Resistance to tetracyclines is also a concern, due to high prevalence of this resistance and important co-resistance patterns. However, the actual likelihood of exposure to antimicrobial-resistant bacteria via the consumption of retail meats, beyond the simple frequencies of resistance found in samples of meat at the grocery store, in Canada remains to be investigated. This study was conducted to estimate the potential human exposure to ceftriaxone- and tetracycline-resistant E.coli (CREC and TREC; the hazards of interest) through the consumption of ground beef in Western Canada. Our exposure assessment simulation model included five modules: 1) estimation of prevalence and concentration of the hazards of interest in retail ground beef samples collected by the Canadian Integrated Program for Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance (CIPARS), 2011-2014; 2) potential growth of the hazards during transportation from retail to home; 3) potential growth or reduction of the hazards during home storage; 4) thermal inactivation of the hazards due to cooking; and 5) consumption. The outputs of the model were presented as the probability of consumers' exposure to various threshold levels of the hazards [10 to 10(6) colony forming units (CFU)] in one serving of cooked ground beef. Overall, the probabilities of exposure to high threshold levels of the hazards (>4log10CFU/serving) were estimated to be lower than 0.12% in the study population (2011-2014). The mean probabilities of exposure to at least 1 log10 CFU CREC and TREC in a single meal containing cooked ground beef were 0.067% (SD: 0.001%) and 1.20% (SD: 0.02%), respectively. This probability substantially decreased as the threshold level of exposure increased to >/=6 log10 CFU. The probability of exposure to TREC was consistently greater than that for CREC. Cooking led to a prominent drop in the mean concentration of the hazards (4.7log10CFU/g). The findings from this research could inform the policy-making process and provide suggestions for adjustments in future retail surveillance plans. In addition, important knowledge gaps in this area have been highlighted.